 

This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project
to make the world’s books discoverable online.

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject
to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books
are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that’s often difﬁcult to discover.

Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this ﬁle - a reminder of this book’s long journey from the
publisher to a library and ﬁnally to you.

Usage guidelines

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying.

We also ask that you:

+ Make non-commercial use of the ﬁles We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these ﬁles for
personal, non-commercial purposes.

+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google’s system: If you are conducting research on machine
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help.

+ Maintain attribution The Google “watermark” you see on each ﬁle is essential for informing people about this project and helping them ﬁnd
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it.

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can’t offer guidance on whether any speciﬁc use of
any speciﬁc book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book’s appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe.

About Google Book Search

Google’s mission is to organize the world’s information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers
discover the world’s books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web
at http : //books . google . com/

 

M.. MA N l L] I
A 5'1" 1:. s) N c» M. I sto N

Ll 1H1? II. Pil-1 31 't' H

 

 

WWGRDMQRW .. J ''

 

 

M. MANILII ASTRONOMICON
LIBER PRIMVS

 

Digit iiiiii

 

M. MANILII
ASTRONOMICON

LIBER PRIMVS

RECENSVIT ET RNARRAVIT

A. E. HOVSMAN

LONDINII
APVD GRANT RICHARDS

MDCSCCIII
0

Printed by R. 81 R. CLARK, LIMITED, Edinburph.

ﬂ &fist-3⁹5

 

SODALI MEO

M. I. IACKSON
mmm LITTERARVM commatum

Signa pruinosae uariantia luce cauernae
noctis et extincto lumina nata die

solo rure uagi lateque tacentibus aruis
surgere nos una uidimus oceano.

uidimus: illa prius, eum luce carebat uterque,
uiderat in latium prona poeta mare,

seque memor terra mortalem matre creatum
intulit aeternis carmina sideribus,

clara nimis post se genitis exempla daturus
ne quia forte (leis fidere uellet homo.

nam supero saerata polo complexaque mundum
eunt tamen indignant carmina passa luem,

et licet ad nostras ema-int naufraga terras
scriptoria nomen uix tenuere sui.

non ego mortalem uetantia sidera sortem
aetemosue tuli sollicitare deos,

sed cito casurae tactus uirtutis amore
humana uolui quaerere nomen ope,

uirque ui'mm legi fortemque breuemque sodalem
qui titulus libro uellet inesse meo.

o uicture meis dicam periturene chartis,
nomine sed certe uiuere digne tuo,

haec tibi ad auroram surgentia signa secuto
hesperia trado munera missa plaga.

m cape : nos populo uenit inlatura perempto
ossa solo quae det dissoluenda dies

sataque sortitae mm inmortalia mentes
et non aeterni uincla sodalicii.

I

The text of Manilius depends in the main upon four use.

G, Gremblacensis, once of the monastery of Gembloux in Brabant,
now 10012 in the public library of Brussels, assigned to the end
of the 10th century or the beginning of the 11th, containing
Manilius and Priscian’s descriptio orbis. I use the collation
published in 1888 by P. Thomas.

L, Lipsiensis, 14:qu in the library of the university of Leipsic,
assigned to the mid e of the 11th century. No collation has been
published, but I have used the plentiful variants recorded by
Bechert in his edition of 1900.

To this us the hand of its original scribe has added many
corrections, L2, derived from more sources than one: some, often
agreeing with G, from a fresh examination, it should seem, of the
exemplar, as II 399 ualent L²G‚ ‘manent L, 111 344 quanto L2G, qvando
L; some from a MS resembling those next to be mentioned, I! and
V, as I 520 puncto Lffl, ponto LG, 820 torn'dus L2H, cordibus LG;
some perhaps even from the common archetype, as I 171 ictaque L2,
itaque LG, lotaque n (om. V), v 487 rorantis L2, rotantis Lu (om. V),
portantis G ; some from false conjecture, but not in all cases if in
any the conjecture of the scribe, since many of them are found in
G, as 1 130 sumptwm L²G‚ summum LII, 744 quo L2G, quad L, quid 11.

The two uss G and L are bound into one class and parted from
M and V by many marks of which it is enough to mention two, the
omission of certain verses and the position of others. G and L do
not contain III 188 a sole ad lunam nwnerabis in ordine panes, IV 731

„ sq. adde sonos totidem uocum, totidem insere linquas | at mares pro sorte

pares musque loom-um, v 12 sq. myrti pars maxima caeli | at ratis

heroum: I! and V do not contain III 370 at simul e medio praeceps

descendent orbe, 404-6 has inter quasque accip& Nemms in ortus |
vn

 

viii M. MAN ILII

quad discrimen erit, por tris id diuide partis, l tertia ut accedat Geminis,
qua tempora Tauri, 615 -am tribus applicat walis, 616 -terimet bis
sexque peractis, Iv 198 quique ‘notis linquam superet owsimque loquentis.
In G and L the verses Iv 10—313 stand between III 399 and 400 :
' in u and V they keep their proper place.

The second family is derived from a MS discovered north of the
Alps by Poggio during the Council of Constance in the year 1416
or 1417. Poggio himself in a letter written about the end of 1417
to Francesco Barbaro and printed by A. C. Clark in the Classical
Review vol. XIII p. 125 has these words, ‘ mitto ad te ...... Silium
Italicum, libros V Statii siluarum, item M. Manilium astronomicum.
is qui libros transcripsit ignorantissimus omnium uiuentium fuit,
diuinare oportet, non legere, ideoque opus est ut transcribantur
per hominem doctum.’ There exists a MS written by just such a
scribe and containing both Statius’ siluae and Manilius.

M, Matritensis, M 31 in the national library at Madrid, assigned
to the early part of the 15th century, lacking the verses I 1—82,
and having after Manilius’ poem the siluae of Statius, for which
it is our chief authority. No collation has been published, but
I have used the voluminous excerpts given by Robinson Ellis in
vols. VII and VIII of the Classical Review.

V, Vossianus 390 (which Jacob chose to call Vossianus secundus
and to denote by the clumsy sign V. 2.), 3 in the public library of
Leyden, bearing the date 1470, containing Manilius and after him
‘liber somniorum Salomon. seu prognosticorum somniorum. oratio
de praesentia et utilitate medicinae. centiloquium Ptolemaei! No
collation has been published, but I have used the numerous variants
to be found in the editions of Jacob and Bechert.

From II 684 onward M and V are in close agreement: until
that verse is reached they are much unlike. M maintains the same
character throughout; but V in its ﬁrst portion, as was remarked
by Breiter1 in Fleckeisen’s Neue Jahrbuecher vol. 147 p. 420,
is a MS of slight account, neither comparable to M nor even akin
to it. It is a degenerate scion of the other family with special
afﬁnities to L2.

¹ Bechert in his edition has ignored this observation, with the result that
from I 83 to 11 683 the symbol ﬂ, which he intends to mean the second family,
means nothing of the kind, but merely indicates the few places (their very

fewness should have admonished him) where a poor us of the ﬁrst family has
borrowed readings from the second.

 

ASTRONOMICON I ix

To L2 we must at this point return. Third in antiquity among
Manilius' Mss is the Cusanus, 10699 in the library of Brussels,
assigned to the 12th century. This is a corrupt and interpolated
copy of a Ms resembling L as corrected by L’. Akin to the Cusanus,
more corrupt but not more interpolated, is the Ms called by Jacob
Vossianus primus, 18 in the library of Leyden, assigned to the
15th century. One proof of their origin and affinity suﬂices: both
omit the verses emitted by G and L, and both omit Iv 235, 312,
746 into the bargain. Amidst their frauds and blunders appear
a few scraps of truth which are not to be found in any of the
four chief MSS and are seemingly derived from a source resembling
L”, with which this pair of MSS often coincideslz such are I 130
summa Cus., summum LM, sumptum G, II 713 sint Voss. 1, sit cett.,

ti
890 hac] haec Voss. 1, hoc cett., III 395 parti] parati (= para) Cus.,
Voss. 1, parat L2, para LMV, parte G, Iv 188 puro Voss. 1, puero
cett., v 8 iubet Voss. 1, libet cett., 148 uinclis Voss. 1, undis cett.,
478 externis Cus., Voss. 1, hesternis cett., 585 Phorcys] sorcis Cus.,
fortis GL, sottus MV.

Now from I l to II 683 V, which in this part of the poem I
call v, agrees almost as closely with Voss. 1 as it afterwards agrees
with M. Sometimes v is the worse of the two, as at I 87, where
Voss. 1 merely omits nauita while v ﬁlls up the gap with rcmiqe.
But v is on the whole superior both to Voss. 1 and to Cue. in the
possession of good readings absent from GLM; readings which are
true or near the truth, and some of which at least are not con-
jectures. I give a list of these variants for the ﬁrst book. I 140
crearint] creauit v, Voss. 1, creantur GLM, creentur L2, 352 lampade v,
lampada GLM, 356 pristis] pistis v, piscis GLM, 358 ‘ni v, Voss. l,
ne M, in GL, 448 innita v, innexa GLM, 460 cesset v, cessit GLM,
467 media v, mediae GLM, 780 et Cloelia] et delia v, est et colia M,
eo colia GL, 782 adeptus v, ademptus GL, adétas M, 787 pares v, Gus,
parens GL, patens M, 87 4 miseratus v, miseratur GLM, 891 uix v, uia
GLM.

This is the place to mention the codex Venetus known to
Bentley from the collation of Gronouius, who assigned it to the
11th century, but now lost to sight. It is of little value and
imperfectly collated, but offers a few good readings of its own, as
11 377 uisus e'is] uisus eius Ven., uis eius cett., 111 261 utrimque Ven.,
utrumque GL, himmqvae MV, 375 ex Ven., et cett., V 29 quota de] quota

¹ They share with 1.² its two best readings I 171 ictaque and v 487 rorantis.

x M. MANILII

e Ven., quoda de LM, quod adde V, quod de G, 609 remeauit Ven.
rcnauit GL9, regnauit LMV.

But now I pass from this inferior tradition and return to the
four cardinal MSS, GLM and the V which begins at II 684.

It follows from what has been said above that M is the sole
representative of its family from I 83 to II 683, and that from 1 1
to 82 its family has hitherto had no representative. But observing
that two MSS in the Vatican library, Vrbinas 667 and 668, agreed
with M and differed from other MSS in giving the poet’s name as
M. Manilius, and , also that their reading of III 614, as reported by
Ellis noct.'Manil. p. 112, coincided with M’s where even V diverged,
I obtained collations of both for the ﬁrst two hundred verses of the
poem. These collations, one of which was made by Mr Georges
Périnelle of the French School of Rome at the instance of my
friend Mr Louis Brandin, the other by Mr P. S. McIntyre upon
my application to Mr G. McN. Rushforth, Director of the British
School of Rome, to all of whom I return my best thanks for their
kindness, have furnished one almost uncontaminated specimen of
the class MV for the verses I 1—82.

U, Vrbinas 667 in the Vatican library, assigned to the 15th
century. That this MS was directly copied from M before the loss
of I 1—82 cannot be affirmed. till it has been further scrutinised;
but in my collations there is much to favour that hypothesis and
nothing to discountenance it. Between I 83 and 220 it offers
almost all the characteristic readings of M, both good and bad,
88 inter, 105 mantis, 115 contigat, 143 labilis, 146 hominnmque,

150 stillantis, 156 aequore, 163 fetata, 164 fluvidum, 171 letaque,
214 stellas, 217 ad eiacas, 220 coherent; and in a few places where
it deserts M it follows M2, 84 commentum, 98 et rerum causas, 207
teretes, 216 canopum.

Vrbinas 668, which I will denote by R, the second letter of its
name, is a MS of like character but less value. It can hardly be a
direct transcript of M, but seems to have been copied from a MS in
which many of M’s readings had given place to those of M2 or of
the other family. It is however independent of U and sometimes
agrees with M where U does not, as 93 imumque MB, in uimque U,
119 in MR, ad U, 200 cum MR, quando U. But the cases where
U adheres to M and R deserts it are much more numerous and
important, as 83 temptando MU, tentando R, 115 contiqat MU, contingat
R, 116 tantas MU, causas R, 121 imagine MU, margine R, 135 arida

ASTRONOMICON I xi

MU, arula R, 163 fetata MU, freta R, 217 adeiaoas M, niliacas M“,
gg aaz U, niliacas R. Therefore I do not include R in the

apparatus criticus ; but I will here record all the chief variants
of both MSS down to I 222.1

The text of Manilius then is mainly based on these authorities:
from I 1 to I 82 on um, from I 83 to 11 683 on GLM, from 11 684
to V 745 on GLuv.

II

Manilius was ﬁrst made known to the Italy of the rcnascence
by Poggio’s discovery of the MS whence M and V are derived.
But copies of the other family soon found their way across the
Alps; and the vulgar MSS from which the ﬁrst editions were
printed present a chance medley of the two elements, obscured
by a. cloud of additional errors and of conjectures mostly false.
A good example of the class is the Florentine codex Laurentianus

¹ 5 nutantis U, mz’tant'is R. 10 sacis R, satis U. 11 proprius mundusque
sauet UR. 13 hac s.p. uocat ,- tandem UR, uacat tantwm R2 in marg. 22 cir-
cum UR, rerum R”. 26 munera UR. 29 inuitis R, immitis U. 32 imumque
U, unumque R. 33 et R, ei corr. in at U. 40 et R, it U. 41 reqalis UR. 42
lamentis U, tanqentes R. 44 serat UR. 48 uinxere U, iunxere R. 63 siquam·
UR, simiarum R“. 67 quam parui U, quamque arui R. 59 percepta UR. 64
mundum U, mundi R. 71 similis UR. 72 propriore UR. 76 immotusque UR.
78 quis satis nouisse U, quisque satis uouisse R. 83 temptando MU, tentando R.
84 commenta M, commentum mult. 88 inter MUR. 91 nee MUR. 93 imam-
que MR, in uimque U. 98 rerum causis M, et rerum causas M“UR. 101
tumesceret MUR. 105 ‘mentis MUR. 106 comprehendere MUR. 111 numen

uel mmm

M, numerum M“ in marg., numen U, numnam R. 115 contigat MU, continqat
R. 116 tantas MU, causas R. 119 in MR, ad U. 120 canenda M, cauenda
UR. 121 imagine MU, margins R. 128 in idem] wale M with est afterwards
added, unde est R, unde est mule est U. 134 ﬁngin or finfflm M, finyunt M²U,
finqit R. 135 arida MU, arula B.. 139 prohibetque MR, prohibentque U rightly.

8
141 me M, ‘ne UR. 143 labilis MUR. 146 hominumque MUR. 150 stillantis
MU, stellantis R. 155 flatusque MUR. 166 aequore MUR. perfimdit corr. in
perfudit M, perfundit U, perfudit R. 163 fatata MU, sreta R. 164 fluuidum
MUR. 171 lemque MUR. 173 ni librato M, illibrato UR. 179 uno MUR.
193 -ne MUR. perhenmt MUR. 199 metas M ex silentio, moras UR. 200 cum
MR, quando U. 201 imitata M, mutata UR. 203 pariter M, parit UR. 207

terem M, teretes M’UR. 210 iqnis MUR. 214 stellas MUR. 217 adeiacas M,
niliacas M" in marg. 53%;; U, niliacas R. 220 coherent MUR. 222 quae

MR, quem U.

xii M. MANILII

plut. 30, 15 included in Bechert’s apparatus criticus: it contains,
as Italian MSS of the 15th century are wont, a certain number of
sound conjectural emendations, but of genuine independence not
a shred. Mr Bechert’s way of using it is to neglect the good
conjectures because he does not see that they are good, and to
adopt the bad because he does not see that they are conjectures.

Among editions earlier than Scaliger’s I have consulted only
the two eldest and Pruckner’s of 1533: my knowledge of the
rest is chieﬂy drawn from the dissertation of A. Cramer ‘ueber
die aeltesten Ausgaben von Manilius’ Astronomica ’ Ratibor 1893.

The edition now held to be the oldest was published at
Nuremberg by the ﬁrst astronomer of his age, Iohannes Mueller,
called Regiomontanus from his birthplace Koenigsberg in Franconia.
It carries no date, but must have appeared between 1472, when-
Regiomontanus ﬁrst set up as a printer, and 1474, when he was
summoned from Nuremberg to Rome. It seems to be a simple
copy of an Italian MS ; for if Regiomontanus had himself revised
the text he must have discovered and removed the grosser faults
in astronomy if not in Latin. Neither to Scaliger nor to Bentley
was this edition known, and therefore some of its corrections have
never been received into the text as they deserve: I mention
particularly III 657 ‘uiribus in tantum signi natura mouetur.’
The Bolognese edition of 1474, which long counted as the earliest,
is printed from a MS much resembling the cod. Flor., but inferior,
and inferior also to the text of Regiomontanus. Of the following
editions I shall mention only those which inﬂuenced, for better or
for worse, the formation of the vulgate.

In 1484 Laurentius Bonincontrius put forth at Rome the
earliest commentary on Manilius. Scaliger (who did not use it
. for his ﬁrst edition) and Pingré, two excellent judges, refer to it
with indulgent contempt; the British Museum has no copy of the
book, and I have not sought it elsewhere. The variants of his
text are recorded by F. Iunius in his edition of 1590, and among
them are several emendations which Scaliger and Bentley and the
modern editors have unduly neglected. Bonincontrius possessed,
or feigned to possess, an ancient fragment of ‘C. Manilius’ from
the great Benedictine library of Monte Cassino, and averted that
he had thence recovered many verses lacking in Poggio’s MSS and
the previous editions: the truth is that he restored II 340, 716 sq.,
and v 334, which are omitted by the previous editions but not by
any good MS; and that he inserted the spurious words II 952

ASTRONOMICON I xiii

mortique locatwr, found in the margins of G and Voss. 1, and the
spurious verses I 68 sq. and II 631, apparently concocted by
himself.

The other early editions having some character of their own
and not simply copying their precursors are those published by
Dulcinius at Milan in 1489 and by Aldus Manutius at Venice in
1499. Pruckner’s at Basil in 1533 and 1551 depend chieﬂy on
Aldus, and Molinius’ at Lyons in 1551 and 1566 on Dulcinius.

l For a hundred years had men been editing Manilius and had
never advanced a step, when in 1579 there appeared at Paris the
ﬁrst edition of Scaliger. This‘ was reprinted at Heidelberg in 1590
by Franciscus Iunius, who added some insigniﬁcant notes of his
own and a few conjectures of more value by Matthaeus Lannoius,
which Scaliger stole as he pleased for his next edition: it is arrant
gasconadiug when he says in the Scaligerana ‘se et patrem nihil
umquam scripsisse, quod sciuissent ab aliis dictum aut scriptum.’
Not one good MS had yet been brought to light, and the transforma-
tion which ﬁrst made Manilius a legible author was the work of
Scaliger’s own unaided wits; but for his second edition, issued at
Leyden in 1600, he obtained a collation of the Gemblacensis: the
second consequently excels the ﬁrst almost as far as that excelled
all others. It is true that Scaliger in 1579 had often recovered
by conjecture the true readings later found in G; but the vulgate
was in many parts too deeply falsiﬁed for emendation, pud nothing
could help it but the knowledge of a purer source. A third edition,
corrected and enlarged from Scaliger-'s manuscript notes, was
published after his death by I. H. Boeclerus at Strasburg in 1655,
with additional remarks by T. Reinesius and I. Bullialdus.

Perhaps no critic has ever eﬂ'ected so great and permanent
a change in any author’s text as Scaliger in Manilius’. Except
the Emcndatio Temporum, which is too dissimilar for comparison,
this is his greatest work; and its virtues, if they had fewer vices
to keep them company, are such that it is almost importunate to
praise them. True, there is luck as well as merit in the achieve-
ment: many of his emendations required no Scaliger to make
them, and were made by Scaliger only because Manilius hitherto,
instead of ﬁnding a Beroaldus or Marullus to befriend him, had
fallen, as he was destined often to fall again, into the hands of
dullards. To write tum di for timidi in I 422 was a feat of easy
brilliancy, and such corrections are less of an honour to Scaliger

xiv M. MANILII

than a shame to his predecessors; but after all deductions there
remains enough to make a dozen editors illustrious. The com-
mentary is the one commentary on Manilius, without forerunner
and without successor; to—day, after the passage of three hundred
years, it is the only avenue to a study of the poem. He seems
to have read everything, Greek and Latin, published and un-
published, which could explain or illustrate his author; and his
vast learning is carried lightly and imparted simply in terse notes
of moderate compass. Discursive he often is, and sometimes
vagrant, but even in digressions he neither fatigues his readers
like casaubon nor bewilders them like Salmasius. His style has
not the ease and grace and Latinity of Lambinus’, but no com·
mentary is brisket reading or better entertainment than these
abrupt and pithy notes, with their spurts of mockery at unnamed
detractors, and their frequent and signiﬁcant stress upon the
difference between Scaliger and a jackass.

There is a reverse to the medal, and I give it in the words of
his most intelligent enemy, Huet p. 87. ‘de poeta hoc praeclare
meritum esse Scaligerum negari non potest ; nam et loca pleraque
deplorata felicissime sanauit, multa etiam obscura pro singulari
sua eruditione illustrauit, nec pauca luxata, perturbata, ac confusa
pristinis sedibus solerter restituit. uerum dum nodum saepe quaerit
in scirpo, nimia sua wepbepyfg, et anxia quadam ac morosa diligentia,
tum et insano eruditionis ostentandae studio, egregium laborem
corrupit. adeo ut quae Manilium legenti mihi clara saepe uisa
fuerant et aperta, postquam Scaligeri notas consulueram, intricata
eadem et obscura euaderent, neque ante rediret pristina lux, quam
discussissem affusas ab eo tenebras, inductosque in planam et
patentem uiam sentes purgassem.' In particular he will often
propound interpretations which have no bearing either on his own
text of Manilius or on any other, but pertain to things which he
has read elsewhere, and which hang like mists in his memory and
veil from his eyes the verses which he thinks he is explaining.
Furthermore it must be said that Scaliger’s conjectures in Manilius,
as in all the other Latin poets whom he edited, are often uncouth
and sometimes monstrous. ‘Man darf,’ says Haupt opusc. 111 p.
33, ‘ ohne Scaligers ruhm zu kranken, behaupten, dass kein grosser
philolog neben sicheren entdeckungen des glanzendsten scharfsinnes
so viel grammatisch unmégliches aufgestellt hat.’ And the worse
the conjecture the louder does Scaliger applaud himself. ‘ numquam
felicius coniectura nobis cessit olim, quam in hoc inquinatissimo

ASTRONOMICON I xv

loco’ says he at III 507. ‘di meliora, uir magne,' replies Bentley,
‘quam ut omnes tuae coniecturae ex hac censeantur. nam sensum
aliquem in his inuestigo, nec ullum reperire queo.’

Barth’s Aduersaria published in 1624 devote a good deal of
space to Manilius without much result. To read 3000 tall columns
of close print by a third-rate scholar is no proper occupation for
mortals ; but by means of the index I have unearthed his Manilian
conjectures, futile for the most part but now and again of surprising
merit: the best of them are usually ignored or attributed to later
critics, as v 2⁴81 fractum silici, 686 mgant abitum, 706 punctis, 739
urbem. Salmasius, in those inimitable monuments of erudition and
untidiness his Diatribae de annis climactericis and his Exercita-
tiones Plinianae, busied though he is with astrology and astronomy,
does very little for the criticism or interpretation of Manilius.
Manilius’ best friend in that generation, and the greatest critic, after
Bentley and Scaliger, whose attention he ever engaged, was Gronouius,
who in his four famous books of Obseruationes has ﬁlled many
pages and chapters with admirable corrections of the Astronomica.

In 1674 Sir Edward Sherburne published a translation of the

'ﬁrst book into English verse, with ample notes displaying a wide

reading but no great acuteness or alertness of mind. Another
metrical version of the whole poem was produced by Thomas Creech
in 1700. In 1679 appeared the Delphin edition by Michael Fayus
or du Fay, a slovenly work, but yet deserving less neglect than it
receives. The commentary, though neither learned nor accurate,
contains a good deal of miscellaneous information and has its
humble use 3 the paraphrase explains correctly many things which
Scaliger had misinterpreted; the text, which seems to have com-
posed itself without the help or knowledge of the editor, combines
a mass of blunders and a sprinkling of Scaliger’s readings with a

‘certain number of corrections which I have found in no earlier

book and have therefore assigned to Fayus. But the edition owes
its worth to an appendix of 88 pages contributed by Pierre Daniel
Huet sometime bishop of Avranches, ‘animaduersiones in Manilium
et Scaligeri notas,’ which perhaps deserves to be reckoned as the
chief piece of work on Manilius in the age between Scaliger and
Bentley. It includes a considerable sum of emendations, less
brilliant and important than Gronouius’ but yet skilful and
judicious, a long series of admirably clear and accurate and erudite
interpretations, and a running ﬁre of polemical comment upon
Scaliger, often wrong but much oftener right. Huet was a critic

xvi M. MAN ILII

of uncommon exactness, sobriety, and malevolence, whose naturally
keen wits were sharpened to a ﬁner edge by his dislike of Scaliger.
He frankly owns in chapter V of the Huetiana ‘je n’ai écrit sur
Manile que pour faire voir que dans les trois editions de ce Poéte
il (Scaliger) a entassé fantes sur fautes ct ignorances sur ignorances.’
Hence it happens, in the irony of human affaire, that he, the shrewd
and accomplished Huet, is now excessively admired by the dull,
who cherish a timid enmity for great and victorious innovators,
and delight to see them rapped over the knuckles by Huet or
anyone else who has the requisite address. His services to Manilius
are not so many and great as to estrange the affection of these
admirers; indeed it would be hard to ﬁnd 300 verses in a row
for which Scaliger has not done more than Huet did for all ﬁve
books together. Perhaps if he had been less bent on harming
Scaliger he might have helped Manilius more: at any rate it is
matter for some surprise and disappointment that so competent a
critic should after all have done so little Where there was so much
to do. But the fact is that his mind had keenness without force,
and was not a trenchant instrument. His corrections, deft as they
are, touch only the surface of the text; his precise and lucid
explanations are seldom explanations of difﬁculties, but only dispel
perverse misunderstandings of things which hardly any one but
Scaliger can ever have misunderstood. When a real obscurity
had baffied Scaliger, it baffied Huet, and was reprieved till the .
advent of Bentley.

⁴ [amida tela dim· : these are the words that come into one’s mind
when one has halted at'some stubborn perplexity of reading or
interpretation, has witnessed Scaliger and Gronouius and Huetius
fumble at it one after another, and then turns to Bentley and sees
Bentley strike his ﬁnger on the place and say time ailest here, and
here. His Manilius is a greater work than either the Horace or
the Phalaris; yet its subject condemns it to ﬁnd few readers, and
those few for the most part unﬁt: to be read by Dorville and left
unread by Madvig. Haupt alone1 has praised it in proportion to

² All that F. A. Wolf can ﬁnd to say of it is this, litt. anal. I pp. 61 sq. z
‘ein Drittheil Knderungen weniger wiirde der mit Conjecturen ﬁberﬁilltcn
Ausgabe mehr geniitzt, und dem Kritiker viele gegriindete Vorwiirfe erspart
haben.’ Wolf, like all pretenders to encyclopedic knowledge, had a dash of
the impostor about him, and we have no assurance that he had read the book
which he thus presumes to judge. Even if he had really read it he was little
qualiﬁed to estimate its value. What he says of it is not false : the falsehood
lies in what he does not say.

 

ASTRONOMICON I xvii

its merit: opusc. III p. 43 ‘dicam enim quod sentio: uidetur mihi
Bentleius nullum in hoc artis genere splendidius condidisse summi
ingenii monumentum quam illa Manilianorum librorum emendatione,
quae a multis ut concessam omnem audaciam excedens uituperatur.
nam si quis quae ille breuiter plerumque signiﬁcauit momentis suis
diligenter ponderauerit poetaeque ¹artem et consuetudinem non ex
deprauatissimis quibusque uersibus, sed ex eis carminis partibus
quae paullo minus uitiatae sunt diiudicare didicerit, intelleget multa
quae Bentleius protulit specie audacissima et obiter spectanti in-
credibilia tamen esse uera et certa.’ Had Bentley never edited
Manilius, Nicolaus Heinsius would be the foremost critic of Latin
poetry; but this is a. work beyond the scope oi even Heinsius. Great
as was Scaliger-’S achievement it is yet surpassed and far surpassed
by Bentley’s: Scaliger at the side of Bentley is no more than a
marvellous boy. In mere quantity indeed the corrections of the
critic who came ﬁrst may be the more imposing, but it is signiﬁcant
that Scaliger accomplished most in the easiest parts of the poem
and Bentley in the hardest. The ﬁrm strength and piercing edge
and arrowy swiftness of his intellect, his matchless facility and
adroitness and resource, were never so triumphant as where defeat
seemed sure; and yet it is other virtues that one most admires
and welcomes as one turns from the smoky ﬁre of Scaliger’s genius
to the sky and air of Bentley’s: his lucidity, his sanity, his just
and simple and straightforward fashion of thought. His emenda-⁴
tions are only a part, though the most conspicuous part, of his
services to Manilius; for here, as in Horace, there are many
passages which he was the ﬁrst to vindicate from mistaken con-
jecture by discovering their true interpretation. He had furnished
himself too with fresh and efficacious tools: he had procured not
only the use of G but collations of L and also, more important, of
V, which ﬁrst revealed in a clear form the tradition of the second ⁴
family; and from II 684, where V begins, to the end of the poem,
his incomparable skill and judgment in the use of MSS have left
but little in this department for his successors to do, provided they
have the wit, or in default of that the modesty, to follow his
example.

The faults of this edition, which are abundant, are the faults
of Bentley’s other critical works. He was impatient, he was
tyrannical, and he was too sure of himself. Hence he corrupts
sound verses which he will not wait to understand, alters what
offends his taste without staying to ask about the taste of Manilius, )

xviii M. M ANILII

plies his desperate hook upon corruptions which do not yield at
once to gentler measures, and treats the mss much as if they were
fellows of Trinity. Nay more: though Bentley’s faculty for
discovering truth has no equal in the history of learning, his wish
to discover it was not so strong. Critics like Porson and Lachmann,
inferior in eI’m-oxi’a and dyxa’vota, put him to shame by their serious
and disinterested purpose and the honesty of their dealings with
themselves. His buoyant mind, elated by the exercise of its powers,
too often forgot the nature of its business, and turned from work
to play; and many a time when he feigned and half fancied that
he was correcting the scribe, he knew in his heart (and of his
Paradise Lost they tell us he confessed it) that he was revising
the author.

It is a point in which Bentley compares ill with Scaliger, that
his conjectures often leave the MSS too far behind them and
sometimes set them utterly at naught. The crowning instance
is v 229 aut cornua tauri for atque arma seranum. But the worst
that can be said of this conjecture is that it is improbable to the
last degree: dozens and scores of Sealiger’s, distant only a letter
or two from the MSS, are something very much worse; they are
impossible. Bentley’s rashness there is no denying, but it is
less than Scaliger’s. Again: he will now and then propose con-
jectures which instead of amending the text make havoc of it;
and II 322 myoniae, 111 421 lucis, 547 mensibus, are very amazing
blunders. But they amaze because they are Bentley’s : in Scaliger
such things occur on every second page, and the reader ceases to
wonder at them.

It was one of Bentley’s chief services to the text that he ﬁrst
detected the presence there of spurious verses. But this discovery,
like Scaliger’s discovery of transpositions in Propertius, was misused
and perverted by its own author till its utility was well-nigh cancelled
and its credit annulled. When a genuine verse was so corrupt that
no meaning glimmered through it, and even Bentley’s divination
was bafﬂed at the ﬁrst assault, then the impatient critic, who had
no turn for tiresome blockades, chastised its recalcitrancy by
proclaiming it counterfeit. He forgot that counterfeit verses
are not wont to be meaningless unless they are corrupt as well,
and that the aim of interpolators is not to make difﬁculties but to
remove them. The best prize that Bentley missed, and the richest
province left for his successors, is the correction of those verses
of Manilius which he precipitately and despotically expelled.

 

ASTRONOMICON I xix

To edit Manilius was one of Bentley’s earliest projects, and
he writes on p. lxiii of the preface to Phalaris ‘I had prepared a
Manilius for the press, which had been published already (1699),
had not the dearness of paper and the want of good types, and

some other occasions, hindered.’ The edition was brought out in .

1739, when Bentley was seventy-seven, by his nephew and
namesake; and such notes as that on v404 declare that it was
even yet unﬁnished. One other student of Manilius in this period
deserves a word, the brilliant and erratic Withof, whose manuscript
conjectures, often identical with Bentley’s, are preserved in the
library of Goettingen and mentioned by Jacob pp. xiv sq.l

If a man will comprehend the richness and variety of the
universe, and inspire his mind with a due measure of wonder and
of awe, he must contemplate the human intellect not only on its
heights of genius but in its abysses of ineptitude; and it might
be fruitlessly debated to the end of time whether Richard Bentley
or Elias Stoeber was the more marvellous work of the Creator:
Elias Stoeber, whose reprint of Bentley's text, with a commentary
intended to confute it, saw the light in 1767 at Strasburg, a cit
still famous for its geese This commentary is a performance in
comparison with which the Aetna of Mr S. Sudhaus is a work of
science and of genius. Stoeber’s mind, though that is no name to
call it by, was one which turned as unswervingly to the false, the
meaningless, the unmetrical, and the ungrammatical, as the needle
to the pole. His purpose, put in short, is to depose good MSS,
G and L and V, in favour of a bad MS, ‘Parisinus uere Regius,'
and to depose great critics, Scaliger and especially Bentley, in
favour of Regiomontanus, who was no critic at all. ‘ Pour expliquer
les lecons ridicules de ces deux oracles,’ says Pingré with perfect
justice, ‘ et leur donner quelque vernis de sens commun, on accumule
des solecismos, des barbarismes, des verbes sans nominatifs, des

¹ The book containing these conjectures is the copy of Scaliger’s second
edition in which V was collated for Bentley ; and Jacob would have us believe
that Withof anticipated Bentley and that Bentley had these conjectures under
his eyes: ‘Withof suas coniecturas adpinxit et librum suum xﬁim uocat an.
1717. is liber deinde, ut in fronte adscriptum nomen testatur, in menus
Bentleii uenit, atque huius margini ea appicta Vossiani secundi collatio est,
quam supra Bentleianam commemoraui.’ Now this collation was made for
Bentley in 1709 (Manil. praef. p. xiv), and writing to G. Richter on Sept.
14th 1708 old style (corresp. p. 366) he says that he is already in possession of
it; and Withof was then a boy of ﬁfteen. It is clear that Bentley, having
copied the collation, got rid of the book, and that it came into the hands of
Withof later.

,/’—‘

*s

(⁶

l

xx M. MAN ILII

nominatifs et des accusatifs sans verbes, des subjonctifs et inﬁnitifs
que rien ne gouverne, des constructions inintelligibles, des mots
expliqués dans un sens qui ne fut jamais le leur, défauts de suite,
défauts de sens, contradictions, sous-ententes inadmissibles, fantes
grossieres de quantité, termes parfaitemcnt inutiles, qu’en langage
de college on appelle chemilles. Voila tout ce que nous avons pu
recueillir des notes de Maitre Elie Stoeber; et M. Elie Stoeber
trouve cela. tres-élégant, tres-digne de l’esprit sublime et délicat
de Manilius.’

A bare mention is enough for Edmund Burton’s edition of
1783, with a text founded on the ﬁrst recension of Scaliger, an
assortment of borrowed notes, and a. few invectives against Bentley.
No more does it concern us that the Societas Bipontina issued a
text of Manilius with their Virgil of the same year. This edition
contains a ‘ notitia literaria de M. Manilio,’ whose history is divided,
after the fashion of Hesiod, into ‘aetas 1, autographa et genuina,
1472-1566. aetas 11, ambigua seu Scaligerana, 1579—1739.
aetas III, deformata ab aggressione Richardi Bentleji, Angli.’

In the same year 1783 died Iohannes Schrader, Heinsius
dimidiatus, whose conjectures on Manilius are preserved in manu—
script among Santen’s books (no. 95) at Berlin and are mentioned
by Jacob pp. xiii sq. The youth of Berlin and Goettingen might
easily be worse employed than in transcribing the notes of Schrader
and Withof and giving them to the world after the pattern of Mr
E. Hedicke’s studia Bentleiana. I suspect that they have forestalled
a good many of my own conjectures; but I have abstained from
all enquiry after them, in order that the coincidence, if coincidence
there be, may weigh the heavier.

In 1786 appeared at Paris in two volumes the text of A. G.
Pingré, with a French translation or rather paraphrase facing it,
and a frugal equipment of brief notes textual and explanatory.
Pingré, though intelligent and well-read, was no marvel of learning
or brilliancy or penetration ; but_the prime virtue of a critic, worth'
all the rest, he had: simplicity and rectitude of judgment. The
text is Bentley’s, improved by the subtraction of many unnecessary
or extravagant conjectures; and though it not only retains much
of Bentley which ought to be omitted but omits much which ought
to be retained, it is yet even now, in the year 1903, the best and
far the best existing text of Manilius. Pingré’s own conjectures
are not many, but sensible and sometimes excellent; and the
translation, though it grows reprehensibly vague and wordy where

ASTRONOMIGON I ' xxi

the text has no meaning or where its meaning is obscure to Pingré,
is the student’s smoothest way to a continuous understanding of
the poem. In no edition of Manilius is there so little that calls
for censure.

There is nothing to speak of between Pingré and Friedrich
Jacob, who in the years 1832—6 put forth at Lubeck a series of
ﬁve pamphlets successfully defending a number of the verses
condemned by Bentley, and produced in 1846 what remained for
the rest of the century the commonly accepted text. Bentley is
ﬁrst, and Scaliger second, among the conjectural emendators of
Manilius, and there is no third; but if there were a third it would
be Jacob. Say what you will, he has contributed to the Astronomica,
as to the Aetna twenty years before, a body of corrections not
only considerable in number but often of the most arresting ingenuity
and penetration. Yet the virtues of his work are quenched and
smothered by the multitude and monstrosity of its vices. They
say that he was born of human parentage ; but if so he must have
been suckled by Caucasian tigers. His false quantities, quater,
othopos, sub hoe, mar et, numerabzs ordine, scorpiam nom., semim neut.
plur., are the least and fewest of the horrors here amassed upon
Manilius. Not only had Jacob no sense for grammar, no sense
for coherency, no sense for sense, but being himself possessed by a

. passion for the clumsy and the hispid he imputed this disgusting

taste to all the authors whom he edimd; and Manilius, the one
Latin poet who excels even Ovid in verbal point and smartness, is
accordingly constrained to write the sort of poetry which might
have been composed by Nebuchadnezzar when he was driven from
men and did eat grass as oxen.

tene feris dignam tantum, Germania, matrem
dixerat iniusti musa mathematici'l

at sua nunc illi criticus te matre creatus
eﬁ‘ecit tantum carmina digna fera.

In his dealing with the MSS this blunderer has learnt no lesson
from the chief master of the art, but conceives a spite against G
and makes a pet of the Vossianus secundus (that is not only V but
v, a poor kinsman of G’s family) ; and this codex, from which the
skill and tact of Bentley had drawn more proﬁt to Manilius than
from any other, becomes in Jacob’s hands an engine of depravation.
In the notes with which he now and again supports his corruptions
and misinterpretations of the text he seems to stick at no falsehood

1

./

J xxii M. MAN ILII

and no absurdity which the pen will consent to trace on paper.
In short his book, if only its vices are considered, is a scarce less
woful piece of work than Stoeber’s: the difference is that, while
Stoeber never reminds one of a rational animal, the fog of Jacob’s
intellect is shot through, and that not seldom, by ﬂashes of
conspicuous and startling brilliancy. They are Capricorn and
Sagittarius: pars huic hominis, sed nulla priori.

Foremost among the critics who have written on Manilius since
the time of Jacob stands Theodor Breiter, who published in 1854
a treatise of little moment ‘de emendatione Manilii,’ in 1889 a
far more valuable and important series of criticisms in vol. 139 of
Fleckeisen’s annual, and a few further notes in vol. 147 in 1893.
The merits of Robinson Ellis will be thought quite equal to Breiter’s
by readers who get their knowledge of his conjectures from this
edition and do not consult the book from which they are taken,
his Noctes Manilianae published in 1891 at Oxford : these students
too may wonder why it is that I comment sharply enough upon
several of Mr Breiter’s errors but never even mention any of Mr
Ellie’s. The third work of criticism demanding separate notice
is J. P. Postgate’s Silua Maniliana published at Cambridge in 1897.

Jacob had provided an apparatus criticus more complete than
Bentley’sor any other but still exceedingly defective: the readings
of his favourite MS V were presented with some fulness, but L was
very imperfectly collated, and G worst of all. A full collation of
G was published at Ghent by P. Thomas in 1888, and a vast
collection of excerpts from M by R. Ellis in the Classical Review
for 1893 and 1894. In 1900, in the third fasciculus of Postgate’s
Corpus Poetarum Latinorum, there appeared a new text and critical
apparatus prepared by Malwin Bechert. In addition to G and M,
already known in full or nearly so, and V, sufficiently known from
Jacob, he furnished an adequate selection from the readings of L,
and thus for the ﬁrst time supplied the learned world with a proper
knowledge of all the four chief MSS. But Mr Bechert has turned
his rich material to no account. He has chosen to imitate Jacob
instead of Bentley, and to take one MS—this time it is G—for a
favourite. Mr Bechert, like Jacob, has a relish for the uncouth
and is not dismayed by the hideous; he mistakes this taste, as
Jacob mistook it, for a peculiar insight into the diction of Manilius ;
he ﬁnds in G, as Jacob found in V, a great deal to gratify it ; and
he uses G, as Jacob used V, to corrupt the text. The two weapons
are almost equally eﬂicacious; Mr Bechert’s recension of the poem

ASTRONOMICON I xxiii

is little better than Jacob’s, and despite its wide and numerous
divergencies in detail, it resembles Jacob’s, and does not resemble
Latin literature. And Mr Bechert has nothing of that quality by
which the performance of Jacob is in part redeemed; in all his
edition I can ﬁnd only four conjectures which seem true to me or
even probable.

III

The two families GL and MV, or call them a and B, are equal in
value. This I say, not as having determined the indeterminable,
computed the number and appraised the moment of their variants ;
but because we can nowhere dispense with either of them, and not
a page of the text can be set right without alternately preferring
the one to the other. This difference they have, that B is the less
correct and a the less sincere; B has more corruptions and a has
worse interpolations. Neither from my notes nor from Bechert’s
will you learn how profusely the text of B has been depraved by
carelessness and ignorance and even now and then by a faint
attempt to think. I 13 hm: for hoe, 22 circum for rerum, 44 serat for
secat, 53 siqnari for siqmrunt, 72 propriore for propiore, 105 mentis for
uentis, 128 unde for in idem, 148 labilis for habilis: the number of
such errors is too great for mention, and their signiﬁcance too
small; but in fairness to the other group it must continually be
borne in mind that they are common in B and are not common in a.
The vice of a is not a perpetual and headless blundering but a
ﬁtful and ineffectual eﬁ‘ort to understand and to correct: its errors
are far fewer than B’s, but many of them are far deeper and more
destructive of the truth. This difference in honesty between a and
B is displayed in such examples as the following: IV 519 incedunt
amodo] iuoeat B, iacent G, iacet L, 623 Tamum-que minantem]
aurum B, arcum a, 742 reqionibus] reeionibus B, rationibus a, v 64 tota
. . . urbe] tota. . . orbe B, toto . . . orbe a, 136 suspensa ad strepitus]
suspensas trepitus B, suspensas trepidus a, 176 ﬂammis absenlibus]
habentibus B, habitantibus a, 235 Crater (sequente uocali)] cetera B,
anatemque a, 329 chordae] boreae B, boreae a, 505 aequorei iuuenis]
aequore B, aequoreae a, 732 delabsa (delabiaﬂ delibia B, deliba «.1

¹ To justify without delay what I have said on p. xxii concerning Mr Bechert’s

lack of judgment and his partiality for G, I here record that he edits in Iv 623
aetam, inv 176 latitantibus, in 235 aratorque, and in 329 boreae. The perversity

xxiv M. MAN ILII

Here 5 has retained the simple corruptions from which critics have
recovered the original: a has aimed at sense or grammar or metre,
and has only succeeded in burying the truth out of sight.

So much for their diversity of character ; and now, to show their
equality in merit, I will begin at II 684 and enumerate their chief
dissensions throughout the next 500 lines, omitting places where
the true reading is doubtful, places where the two families are
equidistant from the truth, and places where the two MSS of
either family are at variance one with another.

a better than 5. II 728 fulgeut a, om. B. 737 stunt a, sunt B. ,
764 ecﬂuat] et fluat C, ut fluat B. 781 omnis a, om. B. 821 aeternis]
alternis a, alterius B. 888 qraiae a, yraia B. 893 aduersa quae a,
diuersa qua B. 911 iterum a, nemum B. 915 imitantem a, mutantem '
B. 925 conubia a, coutugta B. 932 suas agttut a, sna satiqat 5.
III 23 loquar] loquor a, liquor B. 32 casus a, om. B. 62 disposita. . .
uugusque a, deposita . . . uaqasue B. 102 lomis est qua a, genus est 5.
112 fundentem a, fudeutem B. 140 quaque] quaeque a, quae B. 141
mouent ut] mouent et a, mouente B. 158 effectus a, affectas B. 175 and
176 once in u, twice in B.

5 better than a. II 702 nwmero] numeros B, numeris a. 728
quia B, quae a. 734 dimidia B, dimidiam a. 737 suo B, om. a.
744 uires B, om. a. 824 rata B, rara a. 830 externum . . . quiu
B, ewtremum . . . qua a. 883 priorum B, piorwm a. 921 libratum
B, librarum a. III 7 after 8 B, after 37 a. 15 fulmine] fnlsmina B,
flumina a. 20 maguu B, maguo a. 22 maqni B, maguo a. 63
euincunt B, et uincam a. 70 locarat] uoca/rat B, vocarant a. 90
mouet B, monent a. 103 quad] qua B, quae a. 137 cmnpositi B, 1
composita a. ,188 given by B, omitted by a. 190 memorant B,
memorat a. 200 fulgeus B, om. 1:.

Such is the equality of a and B, and such it remains throughout
the poem. Let us hear no talk of ‘the better family of MSS,’ for
nothing of that name exists.

Within their several classes, G is on the whole superior to L,
and M to V. True, the text of G contains many interpolations
which appear in L as marginal corrections only and have not
invaded MV at all; but on the other hand it frequently stands
alone in retaining the truth where L and MV have suffered diverse
or even identical corruptione. L also has some examples of this

of the ﬁrst two readings can be seen at a glance: in order to realise the full
folly of the others the reader must consult their context.

ﬁg; &A

 

 

ASTRONOMICON I xxv

lonely virtue, such as I 545 quacumque L, quaecumque G, quarumque
M, II 39 ritus pastorum] ritus pecorum L, pawn/m ritus GM metri
gratia, III 45 det L, dat GMV, 490 coniungere L, coniwnges MV,
coniungis L2G, Iv 400 consummant L, consumant G, consument MV, 882
ratione ediscere] ratione discere L, rationem discere L²va, v 241 tibi]
cibi L, sibi GMV ; but they are much fewer in L than in G. M not
only has the great advantage over V that it preserves a genuine
tradition of the verses I 83—11 683, but is also superior in that part
of the poem which they possess in common. V indeed is sometimes
the better, as at II 735 destituent eius tum] destituente iustum V,
destituente rustum M, destituerit te iustum GL, 111 316 ue V, ue MGL,
546 die V, dies MGL, Iv 919 cogat V, doceat MGL ; but it is oftener
inferior both in sincerity and, so far as the published records of its
readings allow us to judge, in accuracy. So I will now take G and
M as the two representative MSS and compare them as I have
already compared the two groups which they represent; they will
be found to display in a heightened form the contrasted natures of
their stocks, and to possess like them, with all their difference of
character, equality of value.

G excels not only the second family but also its own companion
L in the following places among others. II 15 Iouis et G, iuuisse
LM. 19 notauit] notarit G, roqam't LM. 168 exterius mirantur GL2,
exterminantur LM. 473 generant G, gerant LM. 495 uertunt oculos
in mutua] uertunt oculosque in mutua G, uertitur oculis in muta M, uertitur
oculis immutaque L. 584 lis G uar. man. 1, leuis GLM. 692 pacata
infestis G, pacatam insectis L, pacatam inferens MV. III 69 sorte G,
sortem LMV. Iv 30 a captis] captis G, eapitis LMV. 221 multo GL2,
multum LMV. 243 Vesta tuos GL2, uastat uos L, restat uos MV. 282
illue aqilem] illue aliqem G, huc caliginem L, hm: caligim MV. 299
‘nomen G, numen L, numem MV. 906 erectus capitis G, erectus captis
M, ereptus captis L, erepitus captis V. 934 facit GL2, facis LM, fatis V.
V 46 ortus G, portus L, portur MV. 545 solataque] solaque G, solaque
in LMV metri gratia. Iv 282 and v 545 are especially noteworthy,
as signal instances of that integrity which G so often lacks.

M in its turn excels m the following passages. II 9 latites corr.
in latices M, larwes GL. 172 hominis. ,priori M, oris. ,prioris
GL. 190 hominis, M, arisGL. 195 uernis M, uertus L, uer twne G.
223 gain] quid M, quod GL. 290 haec quadrata (haeeffl ta)] haec ta
M, haee ta G, haeoea (ca in ras.) L. 375 quia M, quae GL. 474 a
triquetrisq. orti] utrique trisorti M, utriquest sorti L, utrique sorti G.
111 136 quamque M, quoque VGL, 432 mwnere] munero M, munera G,

xxvi M. MANILII

munero VL. Iv 162 metam M, uictam VGL. 740 elephwntas M,
elephantes V, elephantmn GL. V 75 torto M, toto VGL. 138 quaerunt
arbusta] que ratarbusta (=qaerat) M, que ruwnt arbusta GL, rnfa
arbusta V. 327 somnam M, sonum L2, scmitum VGL. 363 limine M,
lamine V, limite GL. 496 contemnere] contenere M, contendere VGL.

Thus far of the merits of G and M; and now of their defects.
I have said already that M’s family has many more blunders than
G’s ; and to show the difference between G and M in point of heed
and correctness I will take twelve lines from the text of the ﬁrst
book, 905—916, where the reading is not disputed, and rehearse the
errors of G and M respectively. G has no errors at all: M has
these: 906 et man for etiam, 911 laseros . . . ari for laceros . . . artus,
912 oum fluxit for conflua-it, 913 qnod for que, 914 aoua for actia, 916
alta for alea. This, or worse than this, is the aspect of M throughout
the poem z hardly a paragraph wears the likeness of sense or even
of Latin. But hand in hand with this ﬂoundering ignorance goes
the kindred virtue of honesty. In all the Ms I have noticed only
three downright interpolations, I 331 de inserted for metreis sake
after ophianus had been changed to Orphea, 850 uiam for procul to
suit the corruption cant/rum, IV 776 possidet for condidit to suit the
corruption orbem: here and there are found other alterations which
bewray a vague and helpless impulse to correct the text, such as
I 353 de toto for deltoton, II 233 de qenere for deqere3 but even these
are few. We have seen the difference in accuracy between G and
M: now see the opposite difference in sincerity.

II 8 sq. Manilius wrote ‘cuiusque ex ore prcffusos | omnis pos-
teritas latices in carmina duxit’: M alone has preserved latices or
latites, and has made the careless blunder of writing prcffasns ; L and
most MSS give profusos . . . . Zanoes; G corrects the gender, prffnsas
. . . lances. 11 138 sq. Manilius wrote ‘solus uacuo ueluti uectatus
in orbe | liber aqam currus’ (‘ueluti’ belongs to ‘agam,’ not to
‘uectatus’): LM have ubera tam 3 but L2 offers the ridiculous con-
jecture nmbrato carru, and this appears in the text of G. II 195
uernis M rightly, nerias L, whence L2G devise uer tuno. II 393 ferit
Manilius: feoit L, an honest error, ferunt M, another; facit G, a.
metrical correction of fecit. 11 534 sq. ‘ab illis I nascentis Librae
superari posse triyono’ LM: because the ace. plur. ‘nascentis’ was
mistaken for a gen. sing, the conjecture trigonum appears in L2 and
G. II 731 pariterque sequentia ducunt Maniliusz· pariterque sententia
amount LMV ; L2 strikes out the qne for metre; G corrects metre
and grammar both with pariter sententia daott. II 870 porta (mstvy)

ASTRONOMICON I xxvii

Manilius, orta mv with loss of the initial, ora L2G. 111 7 coniuratos
HV rightly: L has corrupted tiaratos into curatos; L2 and G ﬁll up
the verse with ad ou/ratos. III 33 siqwmmque Manilius: si was lost
in the margin and quorumque appeared 1n the archetype as qumwnque,
which is faithfully preserved by LMV; L2 and G have the metrical
correction quorum quaeque. 111 332 limite recto Manilius, limiter octo
LMV, limitis octo G. III 634‘ tumescit in (mm ’Manilius, awra LEV,
auras L2G. III 635 status MV, satus L, situs L2G. 111 657 siqui
Manilius, siquis mv, seqnis G. IV 104 in portenti Manilius, important
mv, importans G. IV 127 uotis M, uatis L, mztis G. IV 200 bona
sunt Manilius, bonas ut Lm, bonas in V, bonus ut G metri gratia.
IV 252 sq. fagantem fn'qo‘ra Manilius, fuqacem sriqora LMV, fugacem
, , sriqore L2G. IV 580 ‘cum Babyloniacas snmnmersa profugit in undas’
Manilius, and so M: V has the same letters but divides them ill,
babilonia cassum mersa 3 L further omits one, babilonia casum mersa ;
then L2 strikes out mersa and writes babilonias casum, and G has
babilonius casus with mersa omitted, ‘cum Babylonias casus profugit
in undas.’ IV 588 nascentem lapsumque Manilius: Lmv have ipsum-
que, and so has G, but G corrects the metre with nascentemque. IV
609 ‘Italiam Hadriaco mutatum nomina ponto’ Manilius: adriam
conmutatus nomine ponto V, hadriam comitatus nomine ponto ML, atque
admm comitatus nomine pontum G. IV 659 alpinas MV, albinus L,
albanas L2G. IV 677 ‘ad Tanaim Scythicis dirimentem fluctibus
orbes ' Manilius: at (ad V) tantam scythicas . . . orbes LMV, ac tantwm
scythicas . . . orbes L2, and lastly ac tantum scythicas . . . urbes G. IV
901 in inspectus Manilius, inspectus Lmv, et inspectus L2G. V 12 sq.
‘hinc uocat Orion, magni pars maxima caeli, I et ratis heroum,
quae nunc quoque nauigat astris' MV lightly: L and G both omit
‘magni . . . heroum,’ but L retains the true reading quae, G writes
qui to suit ‘Orion.’ V 40 quisquis erit terris MV: L has quisque 3 G
mends the metre of this with quisque em't in terris„ V 49 Persida
Manilius, per sidera (that is persida) LMV: L2 and G throw away
the unmetrical per and keep only sidera. v 57 decuma lateris
Manilius: the archetype had desumalateris, which becomes deus mala
terris in HV and I/suma lateris in L: L2 and G make it into su/mma
lateris. v 97 de sidere MV, de fidere L, diffidere L2G. v 137 tngem'ta
est Manilius, inqeniest MV, inqeniem L, inqenium L2G. v 263 ‘ecﬁn-
getque suum sidus similesque in mutua pressos ’ MV, which as Jacob
saw is the remains of two verses ; similesque sidus L: L2 strikes out
sidus for the metre’s sake, and G omits both sidus and que. v 414
ue fauet Manilius, fauet MVL, fauit G to mend the verse. V 592

xxviii M. MAN ILII

‘subuolat alis’ MVL: al- was absorbed by -at, and the remnant -is
has been spun out to undis by G. v 596 a qurqite frontem Manilius :
a qurqite sonte V, a yurqit effimte M, asurqit a sonte L, whence G makes
assurqit a sonte. v 599 ‘laxumque per aethera ’ MV, per L, per et G.
v 691 quo perit Manilius, quod erit MVL, quodque erit L2G.

No such catalogue of frauds can be compiled from L or M or V.
Of all the four MSS, G, the most correct, is also the most interpol-
ated ; it has the fewest faults, but the worst.

Hitherto I have been citing passages where the tratﬁtion of the
archetype is preserved, or better preserved, in one MS or group of MSS
and corrupted, or worse corrupted, in another. But there are also
places where both families have altered the reading of their common
source, and it is to be restored by a comparison of their divergent
errors. Here too they are equal, and each makes good the delin-
quencies of its fellow. 11 46 tartaron atra Manilius, tartara uatra the
archetype, tartara nacta M, tartara uatram G (natum L). 171 ut Capri-
cornus et intentum qui] ut quae caym'cornus intentum qui M, ut capricornus
qui intentum L, ut capricornus et hic qui intentum G. 393 ferit] fecit L
(facit G), ferunt M. III 283 geh'das ueryeutia] qelida uerqerttia MV,
,caudasque riqeutia GL. IV 369 quaerendum aliud Manilius, quaerenda
mali ud archetype, quaerenda mali G, quaerendo mali L, quaerendo
mala quid MV. 659 Alpinas cum contudit] alpinas (albiuas L) con-
tundit curm MVL, albarras curn contudit G. 702 eat] erat G, et LMV.
V 366 nitidis olor euolat alis] nitidis olore uolantis GL, uttibi solore
uolatalis MV. 389 angaileaens] arcitenens GL, et qui tenens MV. 425
diducet] deducet GL, dicutet MV. 475 doctim· urbe] doctior orbe MVL,
doctor urbe G.

Some verses where the MSS have thus wandered away to the
right and left of their original are still in need of correction.
V 219 is given with these variations:

haec ubi se ponto per primas extulit oras,
MV nascentem quam uec pelagi restrinxerit unda,
L nascentem quem pelagi restriuzerit unda, }
G nascentem si quem pelagi restinxerit unda,

effrenos animos uiolentaque pectora ﬁnget.

Take the quam uec of MV (corrupted in L and worse corrupted
in G) and restinxerit of G (corrupted in all the other MSS) :

nascentem quam nec pelagi restinxerit unda..

ASTRONOMIGON I xxix

Not even the ﬂood of ocean can quench the dogstar as it rises over
the rim of the sea.

In II 713 Manilius begins to tell us how the dodecatemories are
distributed among the twelve signs of the zodiac :

M nunc quod sit cuiusque canam, quoue ordine constet

GV nunc quid sit cuiusque canam, quoue ordine constet

L nunc quid sit caiusque canam, quoue ordine constent
Voss. 1 nunc quid sint cuiusve canam, quoue ordine constent.

Take the qipd of M, the sint of Voss. 1, the cuiusque of GLMV, the
amstent of L Voss. 1 :

nunc quod sint cuiusque canam, quoue ordine constent.

That is ‘canam quot dodecatemoria cuiusque sint sideris’: this he
proceeds to do in 715—21. Bentley had discovered this, except
that not possessing M he wrote quae instead of quod.

But the most difﬁcult and important passage which yet awaits
correction by this method is IV 7 76, where Italy is apportioned to
the sway of the constellation Libra and reasons are added to show
the propriety of this arrangement.

Hesperiam sua Libra tenet, qua condita Roma
orbis et imperio retinet discrimina rerum
lancibus et positis gentes tollitque premitque,
qua genitus Caesarque meus ‘nunc possidet orbem
qua genitus Caesarque meus nunc condidit orbem
qua genitus meus nunc condidit orbem

qua genitus cumfratre Remus ham: condidit urbem
et propriis frenat pendentem nutibus orbem.

776

¢r<E

The ‘ qua condita Roma ’ of 773 is plain enough: Cic. de diu. 11 98
‘L. Tarutius Firmanus . . . Romam, cum in Iugo (i.e. Libra) esset
luna, natam esse dicebat,’ Solin. I 18 ‘Romulus . . . fundamenta
iecit . . . sole in Tauro, luna in Libra constitutis.’ But what person
is signiﬁed as ‘Libra genitus’ in 776'! To begin at the end, the
orbem of 777 shows that G’s urbem rather than the orbem of the
other MSS is the true reading in the verse above. It further
appears that M’s possidet is a mere interpolation prompted by the
false reading orbem, and that the condidit of GLV is the original.
Next, the mmo of mvl, is metrically more probable than the ham:
of G, because Manilius, as I have remarked at I 10, does not seem
to lengthen short ﬁnal syllables except in two verses of the ﬁrst
book; for in N 280 the corruption of the text is evident. Then,

xxx M. MANILII

from the present tense of frenat in 777, it follows that G's cum
fratre Remus is a false reading; though I will not conceal that
Romulus, if he was born at sunrise on the 21st day of the month
Thoth (Sept. 18th) in the 8th century before Christ, as Plutarch
uit. Rom. 12 8 relates that Tarutius pretended, had Libra for
his horoscope. The Caesarque meus of MV is not itself good sense
or grammar, but it is near the truth : Manilius wrote

qua genitus Caesar melius nunc condidit urbem.

With this compliment to the reigning sovereign compare Suet.
Aug. 7 ‘quibusdam censentibus Romulum appellari oportere, quasi
et ipsum conditorem urbis,' Galig. 16 ‘decretum ut dies, quo
cepisset imperium, Parilia uocaretur, uelut argumentum rursus
conditae urbis,’ Claud. in Eutrop. II 82 sq. ‘tertius urbis}
conditor (hoc Byzas Constantinusque uidebunt).' Which of the
Caesars had Libra for his natal star and was curbing the world
when Manilius wrote these verses I will consider on p. lxx ; but
here I am only concerned with the history of the text. li and u
are barely distinguishable (v 36 celi for ceu), and menus could come
to nothing but meus: the archetype read

qua genitus caesar meus nunc condidit orbem.

B rendered this metrical by inserting que: in a the word caesar or
cesar was obscurely written, so that L omits it as illegible, while G
makes -rmeus into remus and from the dim remains of caesa- elicits

a frat [re].

IV

Some ancient authors have descended to modern times in one MS
only, or in a few MSS derived immediately or with little interval
from one. Such are Lucretius, Catullus, Valerius Flaccus, and
Statius in his siluae. Others there are whose text, though in the
main reposing on a single copy, can be corrected here and there
from others, inferior indeed, but still independent and indispensable.
Such are Juvenal, Ovid in his heroides, Seneca in his tragedies, and
Statius in his Thebais and Achilleis. There is a third class whose
text comes down from a remote original through separate channels,
and is preserved by MSS of unlike character but like ﬁdelity, each

 

 

ASTRONOMIOON I xxxi

serving in its turn to correct the faults of others. Such are Persius,
Lucan, Martial, and Manilius.

If I had no judgment, and knew it, and were nevertheless
immutably resolved to edit a classic, I would single out my victim
from the ﬁrst of these three classes: that would be best for the
victim and best for me. Authors surviving in a solitary MS are
by far the easiest to edit, because their editor is relieved from one
of the most exacting offices of criticism, from the balancing of
evidence and the choice of variants. They are the easiest, and for
a fool they are the safest. One ﬁeld at least for the display of folly
is denied him: others are open, and in defending, correcting, and
explaining the written text he may yet aspire to make a scarecrow
of the author and a byword of himself; but with no variants to
afford him scope for choice and judgment he cannot exhibit his
impotence to judge and choose.

But the worst of having no judgment is that one never misses it,
and buoyantly embarks without it upon enterprises in which it is
not so much a convenience as a necessity. Hence incompetent

· editors are not found ﬂocking to texts like Valerius Flaccus’ and

leaving texts like Manilius’ alone. They essay to edit the latter no
less promptly than the former; and then comes the pinch. They
ﬁnd themselves unexpectedly committed to a business which
demands not only the possession, but the constant exercise, of
intellectual faculties. An editor of no judgment, perpetually con-
fronted with a couple of M88 to choose from, cannot but feel in
every ﬁbre of his being that he is a donkey between two bundles of
hay. What shall he do now? Leave criticism to critics, you may say,
and betake himself to any honest trade for which he is less unﬁt.
But he prefers a more ﬂattering solution: he confusedly imagines
that if one bundle of hay is removed he will cease to be a donkey.

So he removes it. Are the two MSS equal, and do they
bewilder him with their rival merit and exact from him at every
other moment the novel and distressing affort of using his brains 3
Then he pretends that they are not equal: he calls one of them
‘the best MS,’ and to this he resigns the editorial functions which
he is himself unable to discharge. He adopts its readings when
they are better than its fellow’s, adopts them when they are no
better, adopts them when they are worse: only when they are
impossible, or rather when he perceives their impossibility, is he
dislodged from his refuge and driven by stress of weather to the
other port.

xxxii M. MAN ILII

This method answers the purpose for which it was devised: it
saves lazy editors from working and stupid editors from thinking.
But somebody has to pay for these luxuries, and_ that somebody is
the author; since it must follow, as the night the day, that this
method should falsify his text. Suppose, if you will, that the
editor’s ‘best 118’ is in .truth the best: his way of using it is none
the less ridiculous. To believe that Wherever a best MS gives
possible readings it gives true readings, and that only where it
gives impossible readings does it give false readings, is to believe
that an incompetent editor is the darling of Providence, which has
given its angels charge over him lest at any time his sloth and folly
should produce their natural results and incur their appropriate
penalty. Chance and the common course of nature will not bring
it to pass that the readings of a MS are right wherever they are
possible and impossible wherever they are wrong: that needs
divine intervention; and when one considers the history of man
and the spectacle of the universe I hope one may say without
impiety that divine intervention might have been better employed
elsewhere. How the world is managed, and why it was created,
I cannot tell ; but it is no feather-bed for the repose of sluggards.

Apart from its damage to the author, it might perhaps be thought
that this way of editing would bring open scorn upon the editors,

‘ and that the whole reading public would rise up and tax them, as I

tax them now, with ignorance of their trade and dereliction of their
duty. But the public is soon disarmed. (WW
iny parrots, and it is easy to disguise folly bv giving it a
QQ Those who live and move and have their being in the
world of words and not of things, and employ language less as a
vehicle than as a substitute for thought, are readily duped by the
assertion that this stolid adherence to a favourite us, instead of
being, as it is, a private and personal necessity imposed on certain
editors by their congenital defects, is a principle ; and that its name
is ‘scientiﬁc criticism’ or ‘critieal method.’ This imposture is
helped by the fact that there really are such things as scientiﬁc
methods and principles of criticism, and that the 19th century
was specially distinguished by a special application of these methods ‘
and principles which is easily confused, by parrots, with the
unprincipled and unmethodical practice now in question. Till 1800
and later no attempt was made by scholars to determine the
genealogy and afﬁliation of mss: science and method, applied to
this end by the generation of Bekker and Lachmann, Madvig and

ASTRONOMICON I xxxiii

Cobet, have cast hundreds of MSS, once deemed authorities, on the
dust—heap, have narrowed the circle of witnesses by excluding those
who merely repeat what they have heard from others, and have
proved that the text of certain authors reposes on a single document
from which all other extant MSS are copied. Hence it is no hard
task to diffuse among parrots the notion that an editor who assigns
preponderant authority to any single MS is following the principles
of critical science, since the question whether the MS really
possesses that authority is one which does not suggest itself to the
creature of which Pliny has written ‘ capiti eius duritia eadem quae
rostro.’ Nay more: the public is predisposed in favour of the
falsehood, and has reasons for wishing to believe it true. Tell the
average man that inert adhesion to one authority is methodical
criticism, and you tell him good news: I too, thinks he, have the
makings of a methodical critic about me. ‘Man kann nur etwas
aussprechen,’ said Goethe, ‘ was dem Eigendiinkel und der Bequem-
lichkeit schmeichelt, um eines grossen Anhanges in der mittel-
massigen Menge gewiss zu sein.’

But still there is a hitch. Competent editors exist; and side
by side with those who have embraced ‘the principles of criticism,’
there are those who follow the practice of critics: who possess
intellects, and employ them on their work. Consequently their
work is better done, and the contrast is mortifying. This is not
as it should be. As the wise man dieth, so dieth the fool: why
then should we allow them to edit the classics differently? If
nature, with ﬂagitious partiality, has given judgment and industry
to some men and left other men without them, it is our evident
duty to amend her blind caprice; and those who are able and
willing to think must be deprived of their unfair advantage by
stringent prohibitions. In Association football you must not use
your hands, and similarly in textual criticism you must not use
your brains. Since we cannot make fools behave like wise men,
we will insist that wise men should behave like fools: by these
means only can we redress the injustice of nature and anticipate
the equality of the grave.

To this end, not only has the simple process of opening one’s
mouth and shutting one’s eyes been digniﬁed by the title of ‘eine
strong wissenschaftliche Methode,’ but rational criticism has been
branded with a term of formal reprobation. ‘Butter and honey
shall he eat,’ says Isaiah of Immanuel, ‘that he may know to
refuse the evil and choose the good.’ This is a very bad system of

c

1/

xxxiv M. MAN ILII

education: to refuse the evil and choose the good is ‘der reinste
Eclecticismus.’

By this use of tickets it is rendered possible, in a world where
names are mistaken for things, not only to be thoughtless and idle
without discredit, but even to be vain of your vices and to reprove
your neighbour for his lack of them. It is rendered possible to
pamper self-complacency while indulging laziness; and the
‘scientiﬁc critic,’ unlike the rest of mankind, contrives to enjoy
in combination the usually incompatible luxuries of shirking his
work and despising his superiors.

Thus are good MSS converted into implements of destruction.
In books like Manilius and Lucan, preserved in various copies of
equal merit, the editor cloaks his frailty by feigning that their
merit is not equal: in books like Juvenal and Ovid’s heroides,
where one MS far excels the rest, he feigns that it excels them
further, and tries hard to treat it not merely as the best but as
the sole authority. The poet is brought low that the MS may be
exalted.

Ouid. her. XIV 19 sq. Hypermestra to Lynceus:

quam tu caede putes fungi potuisse mariti,
scribere de facta non sibi caede timet.

Problem. T0 inﬂict upon these verses the greatest possible
injury by the least possible alteration.

Solution. The cod. Puteaneus (which has the errors temam for
temeratae in verse 17, dexterae for datrae in 18, and noctis . . . lucis
for lucis . . . rwctis in 22) has here the error marito for mariti,
ablative to suit the nearer ‘fungi ’ instead of the remoter ‘ caede ’:
adopt this error (alas that we must forgo the other three) and
punctuate as follows,

quam tu caede putes fungi potuisse, marito
scribere de facta non sibi caede timet.

Thus we shall enfeeble the ﬁrst clause by subtracting mariti,
ridiculously enfeeble the second clause by adding marito, and in
order to deal these two blows we shall only change one letter.
Q.E.F. When Mr R. Ehwald, whose exploit this is, proceeds ‘der
antithetische Parallelismus der Gedanken im Hexameter und
Pentameter wird nur gewahrt durch das mrito des Put: so
entspricht sich tu und marito: I do not regard his words as a

piece of impudence; WW
Q

/

s

 

ASTRONOMICON I xxxv

In Juvenal the Pithoeanus is misused in the same way. This
is a MS in which aqri at III 141 sq. ‘quot possidet agri | iugera’
has been altered into aqros and iuyera has been omitted ; in which
the gloss nudo has supplanted mero at VI 159; in which cohibe at
VI 347, having lost its sense by the emission and misplacement
now detected by the Oxford MS, has been changed to prohibe and
so accommodated to the altered circumstances; and which is full
of faults, not grave like these, but yet indisputable, from which,
as from these, the other MSS are all or most of them exempt.
Nevertheless when at xv 93 sq. the others offer

Vascones ............ alimentis talibus usi
produxere animas

and the Pithoeanus olim, the editors follow it headlong, and never
stop to ask whether olim or usi was the likelier to disappear in -us
and make work for an interpolator. And headlong they follow it
again at XI 91 ; and where the other MSS present

cum tremerent autem Fabios durumque Catonem
et Scauros et Fabricios, rigidique seueros
censoris mores etiam collega timeret,

they print with P

et Scauros et Fabricium, postremo seueros . . .

Fabricium rightly, for Fabricios is a mere corruption due to Scams;
but this uncouth postremo (a word moreover which is never used by
Juvenal or Martial or Persius or Horace, and which hardly exists
in Latin poetry outside Lucretius) is nothing but a patch to mend
the metre and grammar of

et Scauros et Fabriciumque seueros

after ﬁgidi had been swallowed up by -ricium,

Again, when neither P nor the others have preserved the truth,
and it becomes our business to discover it, Mr Buecheler and his
followers ignore the fact, though they do not deny it, that the
inferior family is independent of P, and refuse to avail themselves
of the help it proffers ; their aim being not so much to recover the
original as to maintain what they fondly deem the scientiﬁc attitude
of hopping on one leg instead of walking on two. J uvenal’s picture,
in XIV 265—9, of the miseries incurred by avarice in the pursuit of
wealth, appears thus in P:

xxxvi M. MANILII

an magis oblectant animum iactata petauro
corpora quique solent rectum descendere funem,
quam tu, Corycia semper qui puppe moraris
atque habitas, coro semper tollendus et austro,
perditus ac uilis sacci mercator olentis?

‘uilis mercator’ in Latin means ‘mercator paruo pretio parabilis.’
Even if it could signify ‘paruo pretio mercans,’ it would be false,
for Corycian saffron was the best (Plin. n.h. XXI 31 ‘ prima nobilitas
Cilicio et ibi in Coryco monte'), and foolish, for such a word has
nothing in common with ‘perditus.’ So what now? To Mr
Mayor’s edition one resorts for other things, but not for help in
difficulties 3 Mr Friedlaender, who usually writes notes where notes
are wanted, is silent here; and neither the one nor the other
mentions any variant in the MSS nor any sign of a variant in the
scholia. Yet the scholiast who wrote ‘ ex sententia tali : tu foetide ’
had no such word as uilis in his text, and all the six MSS collated
by Mr Hosius as representatives of the other class give a siculis in
the place of ac uilis. What the scholiast read and tried to interpret,
the common source of acuitis and asic-ulis, was ansulis:

perditus ac similis sacci mercator olentis.

But his interpretation is wrong: ‘olentis’ is of course not ‘fetidi ’
but ‘fragrantis,’ and ‘ similis ’ has nothing to do with it. ‘similis ’
means ‘concolor’: ‘perii ! ' cries the merchant, and turns as yellow
as his own saffron with the hue of seasickness (Hor. epod. 10 16
‘pallor luteus,’ Verg. buc. IV 44 ‘croceo luto,’ ciris 317 ‘Corycio
luto ').

At XI 1 48 the reading of P and the punctuation of Mr Buecheler
are the following :

plebeios calices et paucis assibus emptos

porriget incultus puer atque a frigore tutus 3

non Phryx aut Lycius, non a mangone petitus

quisquam erit: in magno cum posces, posce Latine.
‘in magno’ is supposed to mean ‘in magno poculo’: ‘when you
call for drink in a large cup, call in Latin’; ‘in paruo, Graece’ I
presume, and possibly ‘in modico, Osce’: such things is Juvenal
made to write in order that Juvenal’s editors may not be forced to
throw their crutch away. The other class gives et for in,

non a mangone petitus
quisquam erit, et magno: cum posces, posce Latine.

ASTRONOMICON I xxxvii

‘magno’ then means ‚ ‘magno pretio’ and is constructed with
‘petitus.’ This yields good sense except that the conjunction ‘et,’
in the negative sentence, is both intrusive and inappropriate: no
particle is wanted, and the only particle which could aptly be
inserted is ‘nedum.’ It must be full twelve years ago that by
considering this reading and the scholiast’s comment ‘quales uendunt
care manciparii’ I was led to the correction

non a mangone petitus
qui steterit magno: cum posces, posce Latino.

quisleten't was mistaken for quis et erit and then altered to quis erit et,
as in Ouid. Ib. 193 half the MSS have hic et erit and half hio m't et
and in Prop. Iv 11 44 the quin et erat of the better MSS becomes
quin erat et in the worse; then quis was expanded for metre’s sake
to quisquam. Last year I found in cod. Burn. 192 of the British
Museum an earlier stage of the corruption: it has quis m‘t et mamm}
In books like Juvenal, where the ‘best MS ’ is truly and by far
the best, such partiality is more discreditable to the editor than
injurious to the author: the case is worse where the ‘best MS’ is
only in parts the best, or only by a little. The Marcianus of Ovid’s
tristia is a Ms whose worth consists in its faithful retention of many
readings which all other MSS have falsiﬁed; but it is grossly and
profusely corrupted by ignorance and carelessness, and the general
fabric of its text is worse than that of other MSS such as the
Guelferbytanus. At I 5 15 sq. the other MSS give rightly and
excellently
¹ This MS is of the 15th century and full of blunders, but it has a few
readings of singular excellence. In the famous passage VIII 148 where
sufflamine mulio consul has been recovered from the florilegium Sangallense,
and other Mss have the interpolations multo sufflamim consul or consul suffla-
mim multo, Burn. 192 has alone retained the early and unmetrical form of the
corruption, sub flamine mullo consul, from which the transpositions took their
rise. Upon vn 22 sq„ where P has ‘si qua alinnde putas rerum spectanda
tuarum | praesidia’ without sense, the other use expectanda, and the scholiast
‘ si aliunde spera-ss I published in 1889 the conjecture speranda (see Ouid. met.
x 345 sperare, spectare, expectare, trist. 11 145 sperare, spectare, Stat. Ach. 11
269 sperabunt, spectabunt, Mart. lib. spect. 22 3 desperabantur, despectabantw,
Claud. rapt. Pros. I 288 sperantes, spectantes) : Burn. 192 has ezperanda, that

is aspemnda. The verse XI 99 ‘tales ergo cibi, qualis domus atque supellex'
is so inept that Markland and Heinrich and Jahn have judged it spurious:

curt
Burn. 192 has uiri cibi,'whieh means that its exemplar had uiri: if uiri is
the true reading the verse becomes apposite and defensible. At 111 185,
VI 320, xx 117 it indicates the old spellings Veiiento and Saufeiia under the
disguises of umento, lanfella, and laufolla.

xxxviii M. MANILII

di tibi sint faciles et opis nullius egentem
fortunam praestent dissimilemque meae.

The Marcianus has two disgraceful blunders,

di tibi sint faciles sisui nullius egentem
fortunam praestent dique deaeque meae.

This sisui may be a remnant of -ssimilem- written above —que deae-
as a correction; or at may have been lost in -es and opis then
altered to usus (Manil. IV 397 suis usu per M for suis opibus super
and Prop. IV 2 64 usus DF for opus are somewhat like). dique
deaeque Mr Ehwald is obliged to discard ; but on sisui he' builds the
conjecture, too unOvidian for anyone but an editor of Ovid, ‘tibi
di nullius egentem ’ : and after all what likeness has tibi di to sisui?

At I 10 23 ‘nam mihi Bistonios placuit pede carpere campos’
the Marcianus carelessly writes mihi for pede, and Mr Ehwald does
not follow it: at I 8 37 sq.

non ego te genitum placida reor urbe Quirini,
urbe meo quae iam non adeunda pede est

(see III 1 70 ‘pedibus non adeunda meis ’) the Marcianus again
substitutes mihi, whereupon Mr Ehwald must needs carry the
corruption further with ‘urbe mea, quae iam non adeunda mihi?
By such tactless preference the Marcianus of Ovid, like the
Neapolitanus of Propertius and the Blandinianus uetustissimus of
Horace, is made to do the author more harm than good; and a
better MS still, the Puteaneus of Statius, in the hands of Mr
Kohlmann, has darkened even the annals of the Labdacidae with a
shade of adventitious horror. Theban incest and Theban parricide
have lost part of their direness by familiarity: Theban false
‘ties are new.¹

  

But it is in books where there is no best M8 at all, and the
editor, in order to escape the duty of editing, is compelled to feign
one, that the worst mischief ensues; and those authors whose text
the kindness of fortune has transmitted from a remote original

¹ Mr. Klotz's Achilleis has just come into my hands. Turning over the
ﬁrst few pages I ﬁnd that he makes I 30 into a fatuons parenthesis in order to
read illa with P instead of illa ubi with the other uss ; that at 75 he like Mr
Kohlmann destroys the sense, which requires unum, by adopting P's unam, a
eorrupt accommodation to the gender of me ; and that at 73 he like Mr Kohl-
mann reads with P haul permitto. Editors who do not know that haut with
the imperative is a solecism can easily adhere to a ‘best us] or a worst us
either, in many places where better scholare must abandon it.

ASTRONOMICON I xxxix s

through separate channels of equal purity are now deprived of their
advantage and mechanicalLLconsigned to deration for fea-Lg-
sffsggmn Wm should be required to work: butchered to make a
German holiday, or an English one. Persius indeed, who" is the most
striking example of such transmission,—both P on the one hand
and AB on the other are exceedingly corrupt, yet each family so
repairs the errors of the other that few Latin writers have a. sounder
text—has suffered less than might have been expected from the
tendency of his editors to lean heavily, some on one prop, others on
the other. Lucan is not so lucky. He also descends to us by two
streams of tradition, the one represented by the Vossianus primus,
the other by several MSS now called the Pauline and accounted the
better witnesses, among which the Montepessulanus is thought the
best. Therefore Mr Hosius at I 322 sq. edits ‘atque ausum (M,
auso V) medias perrumpere milite leges [ Pompeiana reum clauserunt
signa Milonem,’ as if it were Milo and not Pompey who did military
violence to the laws, and as if Milo ever had a single soldier at his _
disposal; and at I 531 he edits ‘et uarias ignis tenso (M, denso
V) dedit aere formas’ and defends the nonsense ‘tenso aere’ by
citing, of all things in the world, ‘extenuatis nubibus,’ though
Seneca nat. quaest. VII 21 1 has ‘ cometas . . . denso aere creari’
and Aristotle meteor. I 4 ﬁn. roth-<nv ai'ﬂov . . . 7‘7 rofi dépoa'
(rv‘yxpwopévov rﬁéw- and Diogenes Laertius VII 152 Kan-611w- re
Kai vrorywvc‘au· Kai AapvraSiw 1rvpd. u'mu &spem-(Bra wdxovu· depon- eio-
-rbv aiOepuSSr] 1-61rov aivevexaévroo- and the scholiasta at Arat. 1091
dpxw‘yv yevéa-euia' «ﬁne-w uffo-xant rob& nostrin-ao· drav ‘n ‘rofi dipon-
waxvnepéo‘repov sic- Tbv ai0€pa G’KQMBEV ‘171a -rofi alOAEpoo· 8517] e'v8eO2rJ. _/
But no more dismal example of an author corrupted through
and through by the very means which fortune has ordained for his
preservation and restitution is anywhere to be found than the two
last editions of Manilius. To elude what Byron calls ‘the blight
of life—the demon Thought,’ Messrs Jacob and Bechert have
committed themselves respectively to the Vossianus and the
Gemblacensis, the devil and the deep sea. Having small literary
culture they are not revolted by illiteracy, having slight knowledge
of grammar they are not revolted by solecism, having no sequence
of ideas they are not revolted by incoherency, having nebulous
thoughts they are not revolted by nonsense: on the contrary the
illiterate and ungrammatical and inconsecutive and meaningless
things with which both MSS abound are supposed by their respective
votaries to be ‘Manilian,’ and each believes himself a connoisseur

‚xl M. MANILII

of the poet’s peculiar style. Strange to say, their conception of
that style is identical ; and the two texts, though based on opposite
authorities and diverging in innumerable details, have in their
general aspect a conspicuous and frightful similarity. The Manilian
peculiarities of V are just like the Manilian peculiarities of G, for
the simple reason that they are neither Manilian nor peculiar.
They are ordinary corruptions ; and Jacob can see that this is so in
G, and Bechert can see it in V. And after all, though they may
mount their hobbies, they cannot stick in the saddle. Again and
again their favourites offer readings which they are forced to abandon,
and to accept the readings of the rival MSS; but these lessons they
hasten to forget, and are no wiser next time.

V .

Thus far of the places where our MSS dissent, and the reading
of their archetype is to be regained ‘by choice and comparison.
Where they agree, there the text of the archetype is before us,
an archetype, like themselves, corrupt and interpolated; and now
begins the business of correcting this. But ﬁrst, in every place
where the tradition is thus clearly ascertained, comes the question
whether this be not itself the truth; and it is no simple question.
The Romans are foreigners and write to please themselves, not
us; Latin poets compose Latin poetry, which is very unlike Eng-
lish or German poetry; and each writer has his own peculiarities
and the peculiarities of his generation and his school, which must
be learnt by observation and cannot be divined by taste. In
Manilius, an author both corrupt and difﬁcult, who since the
revival of learning has had few competent students, it is no cause
for wonder that even after Scaliger and Bentley there remains as
much to explain as to emend, and that these toiling giants, amidst
loads of rubbish, have carted away some fragments of the fabric. A
properly informed and properly attentive reader will ﬁnd that
many verses hastily altered by some editors and absurdly defended
by others can be made to yield a just sense without either changing
the text or inventing a new Latinity ; and I think that I have
often vindicated the MSS by a. reasonable explanation in passages
where my betters had assailed them.

But those who can understand what Scaliger and Bentley and

ASTRONOMICON I xli /

Gronouius and Heinsius and Lachmann could not understand are
now so numerous, and their daily exploits in hermeneutics are so
repulsive and deterrent, that I have avoided nothing so anxiously
as this particular mode of being ridiculous ; and it is likely enough
that my dread of seeming to march with the times has led me here
and there to err on the side of caution, and timidly to alter what
I might without rashness have defended. I have reserved for this
place the discussion of a passage where I hesitated and hesitate
still. I 336 is printed thus by those editors who neither expel nor
alter it,
semper erit paribus bellum, quia uiribus aequant;

and this jargon they pretend to explain by saying that ‘aequant’
means ‘acquantum’ Otherwise punctuated the verse will become
Latin, though unusual Latin, and sense :

semper erit, paribus bellum quia uiribus aequant.

That is ‘semper erit bellum, quia paribus id uiribus aequant,’ their
warfare will last for ever, because they wage it on level terms with
equal powers. The construction is that of Plant. mil. 803 sq. ‘non
potuit reperire, si ipsi Soli quaerendas dares, | lepidiores’ and Lucr.
III 836 sq. ‘in dubioque suere, utrorum ad regna cadendum | omnibus
hwnumis esset terraque marique.’ But I call to mind no parallel
in the polished ‘age (for in passages like Mart. III 50 8 ‘putidus est,
totiens si mihi ponis aprum’ the presence of an adjective in the
right case makes all the difference) ; and the sentence is harshly
and abruptly added to the ﬂowing passage which precedes it.
Therefore I prefer on the whole the conjecture which I have placed
in the text ; but perhaps I am over-scrupulous.

The art of explaining corrupt passages instead of correcting
them is imagined by those who now practise it to be something
new, a discovery of these last twenty years. But man is not thus
tardy in devising follies. Wakeﬁeld’s Lucretius, to go no further
back, is a stately monument of the craft; Goerenz plied it busily
in Cicero and Fickert in Seneca before ever Mr Buecheler wrote a
word, and in Alschefski’s Livy the style produced a masterpiece as
yet unrivalled by Mr Sudhaus himself. What stamps the last
twenty years with their special character is not the presence of such
scholars as these but the absence of great scholars. During the
other part of the 19th century, before the North-German school
had entered on its decline, critics of this order were no less plentiful
than now—the poor shall never cease out qs the land says the scripture,

xlii M. MANILII

-—but they were cowed and kept under by critics of another order.
To-day this tyranny is overpast: the Lachrnanns and Madvigs are
gone, the Mosers and Forbigers remain; and now they lift up
their heads and rejoice aloud at the emancipation of human in-
capacity. History repeats itself, and we now witness in Germany
pretty much what happened in England after 1825, when our own
great age of scholarship, begun in 1691 by Bentley’s Epistola ad
Millium, was ended by the successive strokes of doom which
consigned Dobree and Elmsley to the grave and Blomﬁeld to the
bishopric of Chester. England disappeared from the fellowship of
nations for the next forty years: Badham, the one English scholar
of the mid-century whose reputation crossed the Channel, re-
ceived from abroad the praises of Duebner and Nauck and Cobet,
but at home was excluded from academical preferment, set to teach
boys at Birmingham, and ﬁnally transported to the antipodes: his
countrymen, having turned their backs on Europe and science and
the past, sat down to banquet on mutual approbation, to produce
the Classical Museum and the Bibliotheca Classica, and to perish
without a name. I will not be unjustI and I hasten to add that
WWW cm I am aguainted 1s Auito so
lmnquleish-AQLQ: the resem-
blance lies' 1n the determination to explain what the MSS happen to
offer, and the self-complacency which this frame of mind begets.
It does not seem to strike these gentlemen that if their practice is
right the practice of those great men who in the last century won
for Germany the captaincy of European scholarship was wrong;
that this recurrence to the methods of Wakeﬁeld must acknowledge
itself to be what it is, a revolt from the methods of Lachmann 3 and
that living Germans cannot long continue to trade upon the reputa-
tion of dead Germans whose principles they have abandoned and
reversed. They now pretend that the relapse of the last twenty
years is not a reaction against the great work of their elders, but
a supplement to it. To the Iachmanns and Bentleys and Scaligers
they politely ascribe the quality of Gem'alitdt: there is a comple-
mentary virtue called Umsicht, and this they ascribe to themselves.
Why, I cannot tell: apparently by a process of reasoning which
may be thrown into the following syllogism:

wrpe ao misenum est mo cautwm esse mc ingem'osum at tam poetas

Latinos edere uelle 3
ego autem inqeniosus mm swm :
sum erqo cautus.

ASTRONOMICON I xliii

For assuredly there is no trade on earth, excepting textual criticism,
in which the name of prudence would be given to that habit of
mind which in ordinary human life is called credulity.

The average man, if he meddles with criticism at all, is a
conservative critic. His opinions are determined not by his reason,
—‘ the bulk of mankind ² says Swift ‘is as well qualiﬁed for ﬂying
as for thinking,’—but by his passions ; and the faintest of all human
passions is the love of truth. He believes that the text of ancient
authors is generally sound, not because he has acquainted himself
with the elements of the problem, but because he would feel
uncomfortable if he did not believe it; just as he believes, on the
same cogent evidence, that he is a ﬁne fellow, and that he will rise
again from the dead. And since the classical public, like all other
publics, is chieﬂy composed of average men, he is encouraged to
hold this belief and to express it. But beside this general cause
there are peculiar circumstances which explain and even excuse the
present return to superstition. At the end of the great age, in the
sixties and seventies, conjecture was employed, and that by very
eminent men, irrationally. Ritschl’s dealings with Plautus and
Nauck’s with the Attic tragedians were violent and arbitrary beyond
all bounds; and their methods were transferred to the sphere of
dactylic poetry by Baehrens, a man of vast energy and vigorous
intelligence but of unripe judgment and faulty scholarship, who
with one hand conferred on the Latin poets more beneﬁts than any
critic since Lachmann and with the other imported ten times as
many corruptions as he removed.

This could not last, and a student of the world’s history might
have predicted what has now ensued. Error, if allowed to run its
course, secures its own downfall, and is sooner or later overthrown,
not by the truth, but by error of an opposite kind. When this
misuse of conjecture had disgusted not only the judicious but the
greater number of the injudicious, there followed a recoil, and it
now became the fashion, instead of correcting the handiwork of
poets, to interpret the handiwork of scribes. The conservative
reaction was chieﬂy fostered by the teaching and example of Messrs
Vahlen and Buecheler: men of wide learning and no mean acute-
ness, but without simplicity of judgment. Once set going by critics
of repute, the movement, commended by its very nature to the
general public, has prospered as downhill movements do ; and its
original leaders, as usually happens to those who instruct mankind
in easy and agreeable vices, are far outdone by their disciples. In

xliv M. MAN ILII

racing back to the feet of Alschefski Messrs Buecheler and
Vahlen are hampered by two grave encumbrances: they know too
much Latin, and they are not sufﬁciently obtuse. Among their
pupils are several who comprehend neither Latin nor any other
language, and whom nature has prodigally endowed at birth with
that hebetude of intellect which Messrs Vahlen and Buecheler,
despite their assiduous and protracted efforts, have not yet succeeded
in acquiring. Thus equipped, the apprentices proceed to exegetical
achievements of which their masters are incapable, and which
perhaps inspire those masters less with envy than with fright:
indeed I imagine that Mr Buecheler, when he ﬁrst perused Mr
Sudhaus’ edition of the Aetna, must have felt something like Sin
when she gave birth to Death.

Here are specimens of the art, as practised by its most admired
exponents. Examples of Mr Vahlen’s ‘ gewohnte Feinheit’ I have
given in my note on I 226 ; so now for the ‘ Umsicht und Scharfe ’
of Mr Buecheler.

Persius 1 15-23 :

scilicet haec populo pexusque togaque recenti 15
et natalicia tandem cum sardonyche albus

sede leges celsa, liquido cum plasmate guttnr

mobile collueris, patranti fractus ocello.

hic neque more probo uideas nec uoce serena

ingentis trepidare Titos, cum carmina lumbum 20
intrant et tremulo scalpuntur ubi intima uersu.

tun, uetule, auriculis alienis colligis escas,

auriculis, quibus et dicas cute perditus ‘ ohe ’2

Madvig adu. crit. 11 p. 128:

x 23 Persius, poetas molliter recitantes ita insectans, ut aperte ipsa carmina

lasciua impudicaque significet, uetulum inducit poetam et sic alloquitur :

tun, uetule, auriculis alienis colligis escas,

auriculis, quibus et dicas cute perditus ‘ ohe '2
ex his quomodo editores enarratoresque se expediuerint, prorsus non intellego.
ohe de homine laudantium plausibus et clamoribus obruto accipiunt, qui ubi
significetur, frustra quaero. sed quibus pronomen necessario ad auriculis
geminatum refertur ; qui si detiuus est, cur alienis auriculis (qui sane non
laudabant nec clamabant) ‘ohe' poeta dicat, non magis uideo, quam quid ad
eam rem pertineat cutis mentio ; et prorsus uitiosum est ; sin ablatiuus putatur,
ut omittam copulationis insolentiam (quibus et outa), supra modum ridicule poeta
alienis auriculis et cute (sua, opinor) perditus dicitur; de cute idem quaero,
quod antea. sed omittamus nugas. uetulus ille alienis auriculis escas colligit,
quibus ipse ‘ ohe' dicere cogitur, corpore fracto et debili libidinosae uoluptati
ineptus. debile autem corpus eo significatur, quod cute perditus dicitur, hoc

ASTRONOMICON I xlv

est, aqua intercute aeger ; huic adiungitur alter morbus, articulorum arthritide
fractorum. scripserat enim Persius :
colligis escas,
articulis quibus et dices cute perditus ‘ ohe’ ³

Buecheler Rhein. Mus. vol. 41 p. 457:

Wie leicht der Versuch, es besser machen zu wollen, fehl schlagt, und wie
geffihrlich hier jeder Sturmlaut gegen die feste Tradition ist, dafiir weiss ich
kein treffenderes Beispiel als 1 23 die Aenderung von auriculis in articulis
durch einen unserer geschioktesten Emendatoren, durch Madvig ; als ob zu
Gelenkknoten je Einer sprache oder auch nur der Klatschende so wie ein
Schreibender oder Musicirender vornehmlioh Gelenke und Finger bewege, um
vom Auschluss an v. 22 gar nicht zu reden.

When I read such things, I shiver, and say to myself ‘ numquid
ego illi imprudens olim faciam simile 2 ² But Mr Buecheler’s pupils,
charmed with the simplicity of the method, and perceiving that this
is a game which any fool can play, address him as follows: ‘Ihre
Sohiiler diirfen auf dem von Ihnen eingeschlagenen und geebneten
Wege mit dem ruhigen Vertrauen fortschreiten, dass er zur Wahrheit
fiihrt.’ Geebmten indeed, pkya mime IIépcm.

‘rip‘ [LEV rot KaKd-r'qra Kai M11861! {eri-w {Maean
fimBleuo· ' Asin pkv 635a, [uilo. 8’ s’yytfflt vaiet.
rﬁa‘ 8' &periju- {de'rra 0⁶02 rpmrdpotfiev {Onnum

‹iodim-mu„

Mr Theodor Birt, who possesses, like Ezekiel Spanheim and
Rudolf Merkel before him, an erudition almost redeeming his want
of a critical faculty, began his career in the seventies with a
profusion of clumsy conjectures which found no acceptance;
accordingly, when the tide turned, Mr Birt was ready to follow
it, and to try his hand at defending the corruptions which he had
not skill to remove. Propertius has these verses, II 13 46—9,

Nestoris est uisus post tria saecla cinis.
cui si tam longae minuisset fata senectae
Gallicus Iliacis miles in aggeribus,
non ille Antilochi uidisset corpus humari,

in which Gallicus, by reason of its great and manifest absurdity,
has been attacked with many conjectures, none convincing. Mr
Birt, Rhein. Mus. vol. 51 p. 527, explains ‘quia Galli ex Ilio
oriundi, Gallicus iam ille miles fuerat qui contra Graecos in '
aggeribus Iliacis pugnauit.’ Ay sure; and ‘quia Romani ex Ilio '
oriundi,’ Hector was a Roman (strange that the Romans never call

,J

l __-

xlvi M. MANILII

him so) ; and Alfred the Great, by parity of reasoning, was a New-
Zealander ; and Martin Luther was an African, which accounts for
his propensity to innovation.

Mr Friedrich Leo is a distinguished scholar and critic who has
written several good books and one book which is not good, a
commentary on the culex 5 and this has received more praise and
exerted more inﬂuence than any of the others. Naturally so ; for
its faults are congenial to the multitude and easy of imitation.

Culex 286 sq.

haec eadem potuit, Ditis, te uincere, coniunx,
Eurydicenque ultro ducendam reddere.

uiro Heinsius. But Mr Leo knows a trick worth two of that: ‘in
his nihil ambiguum: lyra deam uincit et quasi ipsa reddit coniugem
citharistae ’——that is Heinsius’ uiro—‘ quae deae persuadet ut reddat,
et ultro quidem, nam nisi precibus nullo coactu pretioue redimitur
Eurydice.' ‘nisi precibus’: so ultro reddere means precanti reddere ;
and dare gratis, if necessary, will mean uendere mayrw, and niqer will
mean candidus.
Culex 58-61.

0 bona pastoris ...... incognita curis
quae lacerant auidas inimico pectore mentes.

Mr Leo writes ‘ mens in pectore sita est, pectus inimicum (placidum
97) uindicat Vergilius (Aen. x 555, XI 685).’ The ﬁttest and the
severest comment on this note is simply to transcribe Virgil’s words :
‘ truncumque tepentem | prouoluens super haec inimico pectore fatur,’
‘hunc illa exceptum . . . traicit et super haec inimico pectore fatur.'
uindicat Vergilius !

Ouid. her. xx 178, Acontius to Cydippe.

quem si reppuleris, nec, quem dea damnat, amaris,
(et tu continuo, certe ego saluus ero) 178
sistc metum, uirgo, stabili potiere salute.

Mr Leo at culex 296 says that this verse, ‘quem nuper temptare
coeperunt et ne Ehwaldus quidem ut libri tradunt recepit, habet
aduerbium eodem colore insigne quo est apud Ciceronem de leg.
I 35 ex his enim, quae dixisti, Attico ametur, mihi quidem certe, ex '
natura ortum esse ius’; i.e. the words mean ‘ego saluus ero etiamsi
tu salua non fueris.’ And pretty nonsense that makes; not to
mention that Acontius expressly says at 233 ‘iuncta salus nostra
est ’ and at 123 ‘ torqueor ex aequo uel te nubente uel aegra.’

 

ASTRONOMICON I xlvii

Mr R. Ehwald follows the ‘ exegetischen Vorbilder, die besonders
Leos Kommentar zum culex und der Kaibels zum Aristoteles und
Sophokles aufgestellt haben,’ and in a pamphlet published at Goths
in 1900 he undertakes to defend the text of Ouid. her. xlv 41 sq„
Hypermestra to Lynceus,

ipse iacebas,
quaeque tibi dederam uina, soporis erant ;

where ‘soporis erant’ for ‘soporiﬁca erant’is a solecism pilloried
in all the grammars, genetiuus qualitatis sine epitheto. All
genitives are the same to Mr Ehwald, and he cites, as parallels to
this, a genitive of material, art. I 292 ‘cetera lactis erant’ (i.e. ex
lacte constabant, see Soph. Ant. 114 waﬁcr devoa' WTépv‘yt), and the
possessive genitives Cic. Tusc. I 60 ‘uis (animi) . .. non est certe
nec cordis nee sanguinis,’ de diu. 11 111 ‘est enim (poema) . . . artis
et diligentiae,’ Ouid. ap. M. Sen. contr. VII 1 27 ‘omnia noctisl
erant’; and because ‘omnia noctis erant’ means ‘nox omnia
habebat’ he infers that ‘uina soporis erant’ can mean, not ‘sopor
habebat uina’ ‘the wine was asleep,’ but ‘uina habebant soporem’
‘the wine was soporiﬁc.’ I am not lying, here are his words:
‘ wenn omnia noctis erant als ein von Ovid bevorzugter und besonders
gelobter Ausdruck uns bezeugt ist in dem Sinn “alles war der
Nacht verfallen, ﬁberall herrschte die Naeht,” so ist auch uina
soporis orant untadelig im Sinne “der Wein hatte die Wirkung des
Schlafes, war ein Schlaftrunk.” ...... Damjt ist der sprachliche
Anstoss beseitigt.’ Why not adduce Verg. Aen. I 1 ‘Troiae
oris'?

But suppose that we could blunt our grammatical perceptions
to the hebetude of Mr Ehwald’s and remove the ‘sprachliche
Anstoss’ of the solecism soporis = soponfica by citing examples
which have nothing in common with it: what then? Then the
sentence will mean ‘ipse iacebas, uinaque, quae tibi dederam, sopori-
ﬁca erant.’ Who says ‘ uina, quae dederam, soporifica erant’ when
he means ‘dederam uina. soporiﬁca’? for not a word has hitherto
been heard of any wine offered to Lynceus by Hypermestra. And
who says ‘ iacebas, uinaque soporifica erant’ when he means ‘iacebas,
uina enim soporifica erant’? Admire the Umsicht which has never
even asked itself these questions. And admire too the self-

¹ This forms a parallel to Postgate’s emendation ‘quemque tibi dederam
uina, soporis eras’ (29 ‘mero dubii,’ 33 ‘cibo uinoque graues somnoque

iacebant'): compare also met. vn 329 sq. ‘custodes somnus habebat, ] quem
dederant cantus.’

xlviii M. MAN ILII

complacency engendered by this union of obtuseness and in-

attention: ‘Palmer meint uina soporis eram sei sprachlich unmoglich:

er hiitte sich nur, um sich vom Gegenteil zu iiberzeugen, an Seneca

controu. VII 1 27 erinnem sollen.’ ‘Cette maitresse d’erreur que

l’on appelle fantaisie et opinion’ says Pascal ‘remplit ses het-‚es

d’une satisfaction beaucoup plus pleine et entiere que la raison.’
Ouid. met. x 637.

quid facit, ignorans amat et non sentit amorem.

‘Die augusteischen Dichter’ says Mr Ehwald ‘haben bisweilen in
archaisierender Weise auch im indirekten Fragesatz den Indikativ ’ ;
and to substantiate this assertion about indirect interrogative clauses
he cites examples not only of the indicative in direct interrogative
clauses (such as ‘dic mihi, quid feci ⁴3 ’) but also of the indicative in
relative clauses: her. XVI 78 ‘ham esse ut scires, mule mouetur amor,⁷
art. III 115 sq. ‘ adspice, quae nunc aunt, Capitolia, quaeque fuemntzi
alterius dices illa fuisse Iouis,’ fast. VI 367 sq. ‘si respicerent, qua
uos habitatis in arce, | totque domos uestras obsidione premi? Here is
Goerenz come to life again, of whom Madvig wrote in 1839 ‘ si qua
est mota dubitatio, fere numquam scit, quid agatur, neque rem ad
quaerendum propositam mente concipit ; cum de oratione quaeritur,
si in interrogatiuae sententiae modo haeretur, ille de relatiua dicit.’

Mr F. Vollmer, not content with editing Statius’ siluae in the
popular fashion, has lately published in the Berliner Philologische
Wochenschrift vol. xx p. 1293 sq. some specimens of what this
method can do for the text of Manilius.

Manil. V 608 sq.

tandem confossis subsedit belua membris
plena maris summasque iterum renauit ad undas.

renwauit Bentley and subsequent editors. ‘609 ist rennuit als
nequiuit zu halten ² says Mr Vollmer. A very pretty verb, formed,
I presume, on the analogy of race, reintegro, reoleo, mundo, and
requuo. Mr Vollmer has been appointed editor in chief of the
Thesaurus Linguae Latinae.

Stat silu. I 4 22 sq.

ipse ueni uiresque nouas animumque ministra
quis caneris.

Sense demands qui, and so the editors used to read. But hear Mr
Vollmer: ‘q'u/is bezieht sich einfach als abl. instr. auf uires und

ASTRONOMICON I xlix

animwm.’ Sense and nonsense are all one to him, and he ﬁnds
nothing to wonder at in the sentence ‘ueni et ministra eas nouns
uires eumque animum quibus (nondum ministratis ⁴1) caneris’ (pres.
indie).

Stat. silu. I 4 119 sq.

nunc aure uigil nunc lumine cuneta.
auguror.

The meaning of ‘cuneta auguror ' in the Latin language is ‘cuncta.
futura esse conicio’: because this is not sense, Heinsius writes
aucupor, which is. Mr Vollmer placidly mistranslates ‘auqm-or
beobachte, um fiir die Zukunft Schliisse zu ziehen.’ Where else
has augwmr any such meaning'! Nowhere; but augury has some—
thing to do with the future, and any German phrase containing the
word ‘Zukunft’ will pass with Mr Vollmer for a rendering of
aqurari.
Stat. silu. II 1 220—3.

ast hic, quem gemimus, felix hominesque deosque

et dubios casus et caecae lubrica uitae

effugit, immunis fatis. non ille rogauit,

non timuit meruitue mori: .

Heinsius, having considered the sense and the context, observed
that meruit was a propos de bottes, and conjectured rewait. Mr
Vollmer snatches his pen and writes ‘meruitne ergiinzt gut den
vorhergehenden Gedanken (vgl. 177 imman'tus), er starb eben als
unschuldiges Kind ’ ; i.e. he has not yet read the next clause, which
is this,
nos anm'a plebes,
nos miseri, quibus unde dies suprema, quis aeui
exitus, incertum,

and contains no such thought as ‘ nos sontes.’ Well may he say in
his preface that Statius is an author ‘dessen Worte einer kurzsich-
tigen Kritik zumOpfer gefallen sind.’

Stat. silu. II 5 1 sq. (leo mansuetus).

quid tibi monstrata mansuescere profuit ira?
quid scelus humanasque animo dediscere caedes'l

constrata earlier editors. ‘monstrata ist nicht zu andern. Es wird

durch dediscere gesichert: die ira, welche die Natur dem L6wen

monstrauit (technisch vom Lehrenden s. zu III 3 39; ebenso docto
d

M M. MANILII

v. 7), verlernt er ’—that is ctmstrate—‘indem er mansuescit! Seven
lines above, 11 4 31 sq„ are these words, (psittacus) ‘ conuiua leuis
monstrataque reddere uerba I tam facilis,’ and they show what
monstrata really means. Here, lest one letter should be altered, it
is to mean exactly the reverse, monstrata (a natura), that is (a nullo).

The promptness with which these scholars defend the corrupt
and the ease with which they explain the inexplicable are at ﬁrst
sight a. strange contrast to the embarrassment they suffer where the
text is sound and the difficulty they ﬁnd in understanding Latin.
Indeed it may almost be said of them that if they are to construe
a passage ﬂuently the passage must be corrupted ﬁrst. But the
one phenomenon is only the result of the other. If a man is
acquainted with the Latin tongue and with the speech of poets, he
is sharply warned of corruption in a Latin poet’s text by ﬁnding
that he can make neither head nor tail of it. But Mr Vollmer
and his fellows receive no such admonitory shock; for all Latin
poets, even where the text is ﬂawless, abound in passages of
which they can make neither head nor tail. Thus they gradually
come to regard Latin poetry as having absurdity for its main
characteristic; and when they encounter in a corrupt passage the
bad grammar or nonsense which they habitually impute to an author
by misunderstanding what he has written, they encounter nothing
unexpected. The following examples of Mr Vollmer’s inability to
construe Statius will throw much light on his proﬁciency in con—
struing Statius’ scribes.

Stat. silu. I 2 61 sq.

puer e turba uolucrum, cui plurimus ignis
ore manuque leui numquam frustrata sagitta.

This means ‘qui ore plurimum ignem et manu leui sagittam
numquam frustratam gerit.’ But Mr Vollmer explains ‘oui
plurimus iqnis ore est et cui (=a quo) manu leui numquam frustrata
saqitta est d. h. vergeblich entsendet’: then he seems to bethink
himself that mortal man could hardly write such stuff, and adds
‘die Moglichkeit, dass St. manusque leuis oder mnusque leui ge-
sohrieben, ist freilich nicht unbedingt abzuweisen.’ Those who defend
a text where it is corrupt are likely to suspect it where it is sound. '
Stat. silu. I 2 139 sq. '
ipsam iam cedere sensi

inque uicem tepuisse uiro. 1

‘uiro ist Dativ,’ says Mr Vollmer, ‘fiir den Mann ergliihen.’ Is I.

s

ASTRONOMICON I li

quo dative then in Hor. carm. I 4 19 ‘Lycidan . . . quo . . .
uirgines tepebunt”! But Mr Vollmer's notion of the dative case
is a case which he can translate by ‘ fiir ² ; and when he edits Virgil
we shall read this note at Aen. VI 621 ‘ uendidit hic auro patriam ' :
‘auro ist Dativ, er verkaufte sein Vaterland fiir Gold.’

Stat. silu. I 4 39 sq.

quae tum patrumque equitumque notaui
lumina et ignarae plebis lugere potentes!

These words describe the public grief at the illness of Rutilius
Gallicus ; they are quite easy, and they mean ‘quales (quam
maestos) notaui oculos patrum equitumque atque adeo plebis, quae
potentes lugere non consueuit’: iqnarus has the inﬁnitive again at
Theb. 111 67 ‘ignara moueri.’ Mr Vollmer’s note is ‘lumina
“Leuchten” d. h. angesehene Manner wie Verg. XI 349 Silu. Iv 8
15 u. o. iqnarae Gegensatz zum Vorhergehenden “unbekannt,
obscur.”’
Stat. silu. II 6 50 sq.
saepe ille uolentem
castigabat erum studioque altisque iuuabat
consiliis. -
uolentem of course means oastiqari uolentem5 so 15 sq. ‘cui dulce
uolenti I seruitium,’ Verg. georg. IV 561 sq. ‘uictorque uolentis I per
populos dat iura.’ What Mr Vollmer imagines it to mean he is
too modest to say: he contents himself with quoting Martial’s
obscene verse 1v 42 11 ‘ saepe et nolentem cogat nolitque
uolentem.’
Here is a similar example from Mr. Ehwald: Ouid. her. XIV
89—94
adstitit in ripa liquidi noua uacca parentis
cornuaque in patriis non sua. uidit aquis
conatoque queri mugitus edidit ore
territaque est forma, territa uoce sua.
quid fugis, infelix? quid te miraris in umbra?

mida most MSS, but P has umbra, which is equally good and there-
fore probably right. Mr Ehwald accepts it, in blind reliance on
the authority of P, but he does not know what it means. He
supposes ‘in umbra’ to signify ‘sub arboribus,’ and credits Ovid
with the aimless enquiry ‘ quid te miraris (non in clara luce sed)
in umbra 2 ' ; and this aberration, which has no existence except in

lii M. MAN ILII

his own fancy, he seriously commends as follows : ‘mit umbra wird
ein charakteristischer neuer Zug eingeiiihrt, mit unda nur etwas
sehon Gesagtes wiederholt.’ Goerenz again: I say with Madvig at
Cic. de ﬁn. II 50 ‘ ego hoc loco et multis aliis, si eligendi necessitas
esset, mallem non inscite errare quam, cum nihil intellegerem,
superstitione et casu ueros apices relinquere.² umbra means the
reflexion in the water: met. 111 416 sq. ‘dumque bibit, uisae
correptus imagine formae | spem sine corpore amat ; corpus putat
esse, quod umbra est,’ 434 ‘ ista repercussae, quam cernis, imaginis
umbra est,’ XIII 839 ‘certe ego me noui liquidaeque in imagine
uidi | nuper aquae.’

These samples come from Germany, but they have their counter-
parts in England. It surprises one at ﬁrst that Mr S. G. Owen
at Ouid. trist. I 1 43 should ascribe to Ovid the obvious falsehood
‘carminibus metus omnis abest: and this too in a. context which
requires obest3 and that four lines lower he should print the
meaningless Latin ‘ da mihi Maeoniden, et tot circumspice (circumice
Heinsius) casus: | ingenium tantis excidet omne malis' and render
it by the meaningless English ‘give me a Homer’s self—marking
well my many sorrows—and all his powers will fail him in the
presence of such heavy woes ’ and proffer the meaningless explana-
tion ‘ the expression da mihi is a general formula, not addressed to
the reader personally, equivalent to if I were to become Homer. So
P. IV 1 17 da mihi, si quid ea est, hebetantem pectora Lethen '—
equivalent, I suppose, to if I were to become Lethe. But all surprise
is dispelled as one proceeds and finds Mr Owen repeatedly crediting
Ovid with similar absurdities where the text is quite sound and
sensible: he imagines that at I 2 67 sq. the words ‘est illi nostri
non inuidiosa cruoris | copia’ (my life is his to take, and no ill—will
is owing him on that account) mean ‘the power of shedding my
blood is not an object worth envying him ' 3 that ib. 83 ‘obligor,
ut tangam laeui fora litora Ponti ' (here am I making vows, and all
that I may reach a savage coast) means ‘I am under an obligation
to reach, i.e. I am compelled to reach’; that in I 3 23, ‘femina
uirque meo, pueri quoque funere maerent’ (man woman and child),
pueri means ‘slaves (Catull. XXVII 1), for Ovid had no sons’; that
I 6 13 ‘rebus male ﬁdus acerbis' (betraying me in the day of
trouble) means ‘in malignant conﬁdence in my piteous plight’;
that in I 7 4 ‘temporibus non est apta corona meis’ (a wreath
suits not my forehead) the word temporibus means ‘ circumstances’ ;
and that in I 11 23 sq. ‘mortis imago, | quam dubia timeo mente

ASTRONOMICON I liii

 

timensque precor ' the relative pronoun quam (mortem) is an adverb
qualifying dubia, ‘with what misgiving of heart I dread, yet pray
for all my dread.’ It is natural and even inevitable that those who
mistake poets’ sense for nonsense should mistake scribes’ nonsense
for sense.

By this time it has become apparent what the modern conserva-
tive critic really is: a creature moving about in worlds not realised.
His trade is one which requires, that it may be practised in per-
fection, two qualiﬁcations only: ignorance of language and abstinence
from thought. The tenacity with which he adheres to the testimony
of scribes has no relation to the trustworthiness of that testimony,
but is dictated wholly by his inability to stand alone. If one
cannot discriminate between grammar and solecism, sequence and
incoherency, sense and nonsense, one has no protection against
falsehood, and believes all the lies one is told. And critics who
treat MS evidence as rational men treat all evidence, and test it by
reason and by the knowledge which they have acquired, these are
blamed for rashness and capriciousness by gentlemen who use MSS
as drunkards use lampposts,—not to light them on their way but
to dissimulate their instability.

I hope and believe then that my numerous defences and explana-
tions of passages attacked and altered by Scaliger and Bentley are
not such as would have occurred to Mr Vollmer or Mr Sudhaus,
and that I have nowhere encroached on the ample ﬁeld which
Manilius’ text affords them for the exercise of their favourite
industry and the display of their peculiar prowess. I sometimes
amuse myself by trying to forecast their operations. For example
at v 289, ‘condentemque nouum caelum per tecta tenacis,’ where
Scaliger writes Tonantis and Bentley Tonanti, I can almost predict
the words of their defence: ‘die Ueberlieferung ist richtig: tenet
Iuppiter fulmen; vgl. Priap. 9 3 fulmen habet mundi dominus, tenet
illud aperte, Hor. carm. I 3 38 sqq. neque | per nostrum patimur
scelus | iracunda Iouem pmwrefulanina!

VI

When a passage is apparently inexplicable and probably corrupt,
then comes the question, by what means shall we correct it? and
here, ﬁrst of all, we must have no favourite method. An emen-

liv M. MAN ILII

dator with one method is as foolish a sight as a doctor with one
drug. The scribes knew and cared no more about us and our
tastes than diseases care about the taste of doctors ; they made
mistakes not of one sort but of all sorts, and the remedies must

¹ be of all sorts too. Haase in Seneca, for ever assuming lacunas,

and Bake in Cicero, for ever assuming glosses, are examples of
editors maimed by their own whims: criticism requires a mind
as various as its matter, nimble, ﬂexible, empty of prepossessions
and alert for every hint. It is neither my business nor my purpose
to rehearse and classify here the modes of emendation; but I shall
mention two, because some readers will perhaps suppose them to
be favourites of my own. I do not think so myself: I think that
the reason why I have to use them so often is that my predecessors
have not used them often enough. They are the antidotes of two ‘
particular sorts of corruption whose ease and frequency are not yet
fully understood.

The transposition of letters (some forms of which, as fraglo for
flagro, impiae for forcipe, displicina for disciplina, were part of the
vulgar speech) is an error of which I have given many examples
in many places since 1887. I will here draw up a list of its various
forms with a selection of specimens in each.

Trajection of one letter: Lucr. II 209 cadere in terram, caderem
in terra, 555 aplustra, plaustra, IV 309 multa, mault, V 617 cancri
so, canceris, VI 977 iucunda, oiuunda, Catull. 61 24 ludicrum,
hidricum, 64 54 (253, 66 60, Prop. II 3 18) ariadna, adriana, 64 61
eheu, heuo, 64 251 parte, pater, 71 2 (and 6) podagra, podraga,
Verg. Aen. IV 564 uarios, suario, georg. IV 71 aeris, aries, Hor.
serm. 11 3 242 cloacam, coaclam, epist. I 5 26 but/ram, brutam,
19 39 (qu. III 322, Ouid. trist. II 60) auditor, adiutor, II 1 79
necne, nenec, art. 350 feriet, fieret, Ouid. Ib. 480 crotopiaden,
cottopiaden, met. XIII 628 antandro, anta-ando, XIV 92 cercopum,
cecoprum, xv 717 trachas, thracas, fast. III 272 quisque suo, quique
sues, IV 726 februa, frebua, trist. I 2 9 neptunus, netupnus, II 460
exercet, execret, IV 4 41 rumpe, rupem, V 12 35 qualia, aliqua, ex
Pout 1v 7 15 tendisti, tenditis, her. III 87 aeacide, aeciade, xvr 3
indice notae, indie nocte, Pers. I 113 pinge duos anguis, pinguedo
sanguis, III 117 dicis, disci, VI 20 empta, eptam, Liu. XXI 19 1
derecta, decreta, XXII 14 3 extrema iuga massici, extremam iuga
assici, XLI 21 3 claudio sine, eladio suine, XLIV 6 12 repetendi,
repentedi, Plant. trin. 224 indipiscor, indispicor, mil. 604 si

 

ASTRONOMICON I lv

resciuere, scire siuere, Stat. Theb. 1x 518 (silu. 11 6 55) cecro-
pine, cecopriae, X 510 ialmenides, alimenides, 924 attritis, at-
tristi, Nem. cyn. 218 ebore, ebreo, 280 uigor, uirgo. With
further change: Ouid. lb. 569 acerno, agenor, fast. IV 766
lupo, duplo, met. XII 23 superat, seruat, XIV 567 monstri, montis,
Lucr. II 680 parcat, parato, Pers. prol. 5 lambunt, ambiunt, V 9
glyconi, cydoni, Catull. 62 40 conuolsus, conclusus, Tibull. 11 1 66
applause, appulso, Prop. 1 16 12 purior, turpior, Gratt. 459 defugit
a, defuit ac, Sen. Herc. Oet. 1767 spolium, solitum, Val. F1. I 742
stupet aea, stupe acta, Stat. Theb. V 470 aduersi, adsueti, Verg.
Aen. IX 517 armorum, murorum, Tac. hist. III 9 Uipstanus, uipsanius,
Liu. XXI 8 10 abiegno, ab ligneo, XLII 41 12 sum persecutus,
sumpsere cuius.

Inversion of two letters: Verg. georg. 111 440 (Lucr. VI 565,
Hor. carm. I 15 24, Tibull. I 1 59, Prop. III 13 55, Ouid. her.
XIII 72, Sen. Oed. 466, Stat. silu. V 3 242) te, et, II 313 (III 95,
IV 322, Aen. XII 883, Cic. phaen. 2) ima, iam, I 115 (III 2, IV 293,
Aen. II 296, IV 34, 490, V 634, Sen. Thy. 68) amnis, manis, II 277
setius, estius, III 166 circlos, cn'clos, 255 (559) mus, usus, 381 trioni,
tironi, IV 123 tacuissem, tcauissem, 346 (Prop. 11 8 39) martis, matris,
Aen. 1 24 (Ouid. met. I 600, fast. V 651, Sen. Phaed. 1057, Oed.
486) arqis, aqris, 11 15 instar, inst/rd, III 158 astra, asrta, IV 220
(Ouid. met. XIII 649, Sen. Oed. 951) partem, patrem, 250 (Lucr.
I 489, V 675, VI 84, 257) flumen, fulmen, 438 fert, fret, 495 arm,
aram, 684 germanam, geramnam, VIII 72 sancto, emoto, buc. V 21
coryli, ocryli, Hor. carm. I 31 16 cichorea, cichorae, 111 12 6 liparei,
liparia, serm. 1 3 90 commixit, commixti, epist. I 6 58 gargilius,
gragilius, 11 24 ut, m, 18 111 set, est, art. 36 (Lucr. IV 517) prauo,
paruo, 423 (Lucr. VI 1147) artis, atris, Prop. 1 3 27 duxti, duxit,
14 24 (III 7 61) alcinoi, alcioni, II 6 6 phryne, phyrne, 13 55
paludibus, plaudibus, 28 29 heroidas, herodias, 111 5 35 plaustra,
palustre, 13 24 (Stat. Theb. XI 321)pia, ipit, 15 41 prata, parta, IV
5 74 clatra, caltra, Ouid. met. 111 540 acrior, carior, VI 78 acutae,
cautae, 117 aloidas, aolidae, 350 (Stat. Theb. VI 57) aera, arca, XII
329 execrere, exercere, xm 45 pomum, poaentia, 588 (fast. I 615,
707, Sen. Herc. Oet. 29, Stat. silu. II 6 13) dies, deis, trist. IV 2 33
inclusit, inculsit, V 10 27 idem, diem, Tac. hist. I 15 m, 172:, Cic.
Rose. Am. 66 elui, leui, Plant. capt. 209 id, di, Tibull. II 4 3 teneor,
tenero, Stat. Ach. 1 653 uisa, uias, Germ. phaon. 153 arator, aratro,
Anien. Arat. 420 puppes, ppwpes, Sen. Phaed. 541 praeceps, praecesp,
780 cingent, cingmt, 877 continget, contignet, 1227 cingens, ciqnens,

lvi M. MAN ILII

Oct. 105 fruor, furor, catull. 45 4 omnes, omens, 74 3 perdepsuit,
per-despuit, 90 6 omentum, omne tum, Lucr. V 1116 creti, certi,
VI 402 eas tum, aestum, 642 flammea, flammae, 749 ipso, piso, 907
lapis, lapsi, 938 ad res, ardes. With further change: Lucr. I 741
(Tibull. III 2 27, Stat. silu. II 6 58, Ouid. fast Iv 807) casu, causa,
V 186 (Pers. V 105, Sen. Phoen. 184) specimen, speciem, 193 meatus,
maestus, 854 mutent, metuent, VI 179 liquescit, quiescit, 1089 fieri,
ferri, Catull. 93 2 scire, si ore, Tibull. II 5 70 pertulerit, perluerit, pan.
Mess. 72 (Ouid. met. VI 77, her. XVIII 205, Sen. Herc. Oet. 1240)
sera, freta, Ouid. met. I 196 superi, pueri, 111 39 umas, undae, IV 646
moenibus, montibus, V 107 broteas, boreas, VII 248 cinit, lcuit,
VIII 444 recalfecit, recalescit, XII 382 uara, dura, fest. III 547 cinis,
iqnis, rem. 778 toro, oiro, trist. I 10 9 coquite, concita, Verg. georg.
IV 110 furum, frugum, Aen. II 771 (IX 552, XII 505, Luc. I 254,
VII 295, Sen. Thy. 739) menti, furenti, Sen. Ag. 650 deflere, deferre,
Stat. Theb. VII 342 orbata, oblata, Tac. hist. III 27 ligones, leqiones,
Liu. III 70 6 integrum, interdum, XXII 7 13 conplexu, conspexu,
14 4 segnibus, sensibus, Mart. III 60 5 suillos, pusillos, Il. Lat. 980
en, 72, Claud. 111 cons. Hon. 17 cunabula, uenabula, qu. vm 155
robum, toruum.

Inversion of three letters: Liu. xm 16 9 cis, sic, 29 6 enixe,
exine, Lucr. III 170 (Verg. Aen. XII 916) teli, leti, 305 pauoris,
uaporis, V 208 (Verg. georg. II 400) bidenti, dibenti, VI 851 (Liu.
XXII 6 10) raptim, partim, Verg. georg. II 203 (356, III 515, Hor.
carm. III 13 11) uomere, mouere, 512 sole, lose, III 274 (Pers. V 90,
Stat. Theb. VII 575, silu. V 2 40) exceptant, expectant, Aen. I 445
facilem, salicem, VI 221 nota, nato, VIII 317 parto, rapto, Hor. carm.
II 20 15 getulas, tegulas, III 9 9 regit, riqet, epod. 5 15 inplicata,
inplacita, 16 51 ouile, oliuae, serm. I 2 3 tiqelli, teqilli, 3 37 felix,
filex, epist. I 3 31 mwnatius, numatius, 6 18 (Ouid. met. XI 506,
Germ. phaen. 577) suspice, suscipe, Ouid. met. II 415 maenalon,
melanuri, X 48 eurydicen, euryoiden, XI 28 mwnera, n'wmera, 489
(Tibull. III 3 22, Stat. Theb. vn 251, silu. 111 3 49) yeruntur,
requntur, XIII 731 revomit, remouit, XIV 86 hippotadae, hippodate,
89 inarimen, iramimen, XV 705 caulona, caumla, trist. I 6 1 (11 541,
V 6 21) dilecta, delicta, II 379 sciremus, scerimus, lb. 358 (Catuli.
64 350, qu. VI 493) crimen, crinem, 404 dexameni, dexemani, fast.
II 740 mero, more, her. XII 120 credulitatis, crudelitatis, XVIII 133
limes, miles, XX 30 uafer, fauor, Sen. Tro. 105 latus, talus, 563
possedit, possidet, 799 rapiet, pariet, Phaed. 1201 taenarei, tenerai,
Ag. 188 pwridis, rapidis, 781 redit, ridet, Herc. Oet. 1969 paret,

ASTRONOMICON I lvii

pater, Oct. 141 pactus, captus, Stat. Theb. Iv 461 plorata, prolata,
VII 110 uires, ueris, 511 doli, dilo, VIII 718 (740, qu. VIII 229)
melanippus, menalippus, Plant. mil. 1243 uilem, uelim, Tac. hist.
111 7 nulio, uideo, Cic. de fin. 111 49 (Non. p. 64 31) bonis, nobis,
de diu. 1 30 direxit, dixerit, pro Clu. 49 uenerit, ueniret, Prop. 1 1 9
milanion, minalion, Phaed. 111 19 7 redire, n'dere, Germ. phaen. 331
tale, tela, Auien. Arat. 56 gelido, legido. With further change:
Mart. XIV 162 1 mula, plu/ma, Hor. serm. 1 1 38 (epist. I 7 40)
sapiens, patiens, 11 3 21 uafer, faber, Prop. I 1 1 cepit, fecit, Lucr.
II 199 (Ouid. Ib. 598) remit, remouet, VI 916 peruolat, perualet,
Catull. 17 10 putidae, pudicae, Verg. bue. V 61 (Ouid. her. XX 41)
dolum, modum, georg. 1 122 per artem, parentem, II 514 penates,
nepotes, 111 235 refectae, receptae, IV 176 aliter, alioet, 548 facessit,
capessit,·¹Aen. IV 169 (VII 481, Ouid. met. IV 563, trist. V 2 3)
malorum, laborum, Stat. Theb. II 328 pastus, saltus, IV 528 (VI 525)
speculis, scopulis, X 915 stygias, scytias, Ach. I 582 perdita, perfida,
Sen. Tro. 1082 gerit, teqit, Ag. 428 remiqem, regimen, Herc. Oet.
1443 awlo, leto, Ouid. met. II 421 posita, solita, III 725 aspice, accipe,
v 482 lassa, salsa, VI 556 (XII 277, Pers. IV 10) forcipe, forfice,
VII 559 nude, dua-a, 763 pestis, cessit, XII 18 prouidus, prodique,
XIII 733 ora gerens, ore carens, XV 818 colatur, locetur, fast. II 585
inmodico, indomito, III 418 gratare, cratera, trist. IV 5 27 bonitate,
nouitate, ex ‘Pont. II 10 18 sequamur, queramur, her. xx 210 motis,
toris. ⁴

At this point I omit the frequent confusions modo domo, yeret
reget, limitis militis and many like them, because these may be
assigned indifferently to the preceding and to the following class
(mo-do, do-mo).

Transpositions of syllables: Verg. Aen. XI 711 pua-ra, rapa,
culex 355 la-te, te-la, Ouid. Ib. 246 er-it, tit-er, met. XI 200 laomo-
donta, laedo-menta, XII 306 mela-neus, menelaus, XIII 686 ro-gi,
qy-ro, trist. V 6 11 (Il. Lat. 218) podoelifius, poli-darius, rem. 243
diso-edere, ded-isoere, her. VIII 88 quodue mihi, quod mihi uae, Hor.
carm. I 36 1.7 prb-tres, tres—pu, Stat. Ach. I 638 preme-s urentia,
prosu—merentia, 11 4 bacchi-ca mos, camxos bacchi, silu. III 5 57 tra-
chinia, iwtracia, Amm. Marc. XIX 10 4 incunabu-lis, incunali-lms,
heptat. Lat. gen. 421 qua-terni, terni-qm, Plant. mil. 356 mini-me,
mo-mini, trin. 521 umquam fieri neque gnati tui, umfieri neque gnati
tui quam, Lucr. 111 154 ita palloremque, itaquo pallorem, IV 1145
cauereque m, cauere oze-que, V 227 restet transire, re et transirest,
Germ. phaen. 143 prior—a tenec, ate prim· nec. With further change :

lviii M. MAN ILII

Hor. carm. III 8 27 ‘ra-pe, spe-ra, Non. p. 93 33 bus-to, (Jo-bus, Prop.
II 34 53 restabit erumpnas, restauer-it undas, III 5 24 sparsor-it,
sparsit a, 23 21 rettuler-it, retulit et, IV 1 106 umbraue quas, um-
braque ne, Catull. 58 5 magna-ml-mi remi, magna. amiremimi, Ouid.
met. II 688 uocabant, ca-nebant, 111 567 remoramina, moderamina,
IV 230 neo-ratus, re-motus, X 653 pede libat, pewdebat, XIV 254
stet-imusque, simubatque, trist. I 2 7 Oder-at, odat-ur, 11 168 per tua
perque, pape-tuosque, 565 sali-lma, stam-lis, IV 2 31 host-ilibus, im
hostibus, Pers. 1 114 discedo secuit, dissemit cedo, Stat. Theb. vn 112
tce-lit, lirbet, silu. I praei. conual-escenti, est valenti, Sen. Thy. 488
test-or tarmen, hortamen est, Phaed. III 10 36 mali-qna insontem,
maqna imo-lentem, Auien. Arat. 1630 frater-nos, mn: fratrem, Cic. de
ﬁn. V 9 mathematicorum, in achad-micorum, pro Sest. 131 sal-ucis,
ut scitis, Liu. XXII 25 12 in-scitiam, scientiam, XXXV 10 8 legarto,
col-lega, Tac. hist. I 31 celsum infestis, festum incestis.

Transposition of two letters across an intervening space : Prop.
111 3 35 newis, uernis, 13 11 matrona, motrana, IV l 129 (Ter.
haut. 535, Verg. buc. X 68, Ouid. her. IV 45, art. II 729, ciris 275)
uersarent, seruarent, Ouid. met. v 246 detrectas, detractes, VI 234
(Sen. Thy. 416) dantem, tandem, Hor. epist. I 2 5 distenet, destinet,
Val. Fl. I 564 phlegrae, phreglae, Stat. Theb. 11 311 (Liu. XXIV
45 2) descisse, discesse, Cic. de leg. II 57 porcus, colpus, Plant. rud.
545 ballena, bellana, Auien. Arat. 540 ductos, doetus, cops. 34 prisca,
crispa, Liu. XLI 24 14 (Cic. ad Att. IV 5 2) faceret, fecerat, 11. Lat.
786 polydamas, palydomas, Luc. VII 491 romana, ramano, el. in
Maec. 1 105 argo saxa, arga saxo, 95 odorata, adorato, qu. x 294
uerginia, uirginea, Sen. Herc. Oet. 496 facilis in species, faciles
inspicies. With further change: Lucr. VI 339 plagis, gladis, 1122
qua graditur, quadragitas, Verg. Aen. I 264 contundet, contendunt,
Ouid. met. VII 580 caeli, laeti, VIII 588 resoluit, reuulsit, XI 687
tetendi, tenenti, fast. V 507 exsuscitat, excussit ab, ex Pont. II 10
43 absim, ipsam, Prop. II 21 11 quondam, quando, Germ. phaon.
83 pondus, pandos, Luc. VII 509 torrente, terrore, 645 ceruice, uertice,
Stat. Theb. XI 588 effossae, offensae, silu. V 3 288 porta, parte, Sen.
Herc. Oet. 1790 caeperit, partem, Oct. 731 crispinus, pristinus,
Phaed. 740 porriyit, corripit.

Rearrangement of four or more letters : Prop. 111 5 24 et nigras,
integras, IV 10 37 tolumm', telinum, Plaut. rud. 927 gripe, piore,
true. 730 saluum, lausum, Lucr. I 708 (Auien. Arat. 1003) putarunt,
putantur, Ouid. met. VI 407 (fast. III 841) paternis, parentis, fast.
11 663 thyreatida, thyaterida, ex Pont. III 3 102 (Stat. Theb. I 340)

ASTRONOMICON I lix

serpit, repsit, her. XVIII 15 felix, flexi, Sen. Phoen. 195 ipse eui, ipsi
ceu, Herc. Oet. 49 nemo, omne, Auien. Arat- 136 indeque, denique,
Cic. pro clu. 16 namque, nequam, Ouid. met. 11 485 tamen, manet,
her. IX 20 twtpis, stupri, Prop. II 34 29 crethei, erechti, III 20 tit.
contemptore, comptentore, schol. ad Pers. II 72 walerio, aurelio, Liu.
XXXIV 3 1 auimo, omma, Stat. Theb. X. 305 ial'menus, alinemus,
Ouid. Ib. 348 tisameni, tesimeni, trist. I 1 83 (met. VIII 276, ex
Pout. Iv 14 32) arqolica, aqrieola. With further change: Mart. V
37 7 mine, niqra, Sen. Oed. 130 septem, semper, Ag. 111 uidua, iuncta,
Ouid. met. VIII 301 praestantes, spectantes, x111 122 relatis, lacertis,
XIV 233 lami, imas, 850 priscum, positum, XV 804 aeneaden, tamdem,
trist. IV 10 130 mom'ar, maior, met. III 235 anticipata, praeamata,
XIII 624 patrem, templa, Catull. 22 5 palimpsesto, palmisepto, Mart.
XI 99 5 gemim, maqni, Stat. Aeh. I 344 therapnis, pharetris, Il.

Lat. 430 maeoniam, meridiem, qu. VIII 175 sandapilam, sar- '

dammum, Auien. Arat. 1728 procumbentia, cqpum hretia, Amm.
Marc. XXVII 6 12 salutem, latus, Liu. XXVI 31 3 a p. ro. si, portas,
Sen. de clem. I 12 cum quaeremus, consequemur, Cic. pro clu. 47
&Hyantia diqnitate, de dom. 23 uisceribus aerari, ui caesaris rebus.

Such transpositions occur in the texts of all authors, and
Manilius is no exception: II 182 ueris, uires, 587 reum sponsor,
rerum sponso, 932 suas aqitat, sua fatigat, 111 272 grauidus, gradibus,
544 m'ces, ciues, IV 282 aqilem, caliqiroe, 531 exustus, exsutus,
551 regentur, yerentur, 591 eurus, uerus, 662 pestis, pieces, 668
cercopum, cecropum, cecoprum, 677 tanaim, tantam, 7 48 dorsumq.
leuari, dorsum lequari, 903 secessit, sic esset, V 143 eduntur,
eduezmt, 326 oeagrius, oegraius, 425 diducet, dicutet, 729 stipatum,
spatium. On these observations I have acted in correcting I 84,
88, 214, 277, 285, 344, 408, 517, 599.

I now come to another method of correction, which I have
employed at I 72, 145, 311, 331, 455, 530, 637; a method
demanded by the complications which ensue, in the text of poets,
upon corruptions which destroy the metre. When a word has
fallen out and left the verse defective, the scribes insert another
word in the gap ; and when a word has lost its metrical form and
brought the verse to a standstill, the scribes set it going again by
a change of order.

In Ouid. met. VI 376 the valuable codex Laurentianus has
these words,

quamuis sint sub aqua, linguis maledicere temptant.

1x M. MAN ILII

If the other MSS agreed with it, this reading would now stand in
the modern editions of Ovid. Heinsius and Bentley would
instantly have perceived that this superﬂuous and pointless linquis
was not Ovid’s, and they would both have conjectured

quamuis sint sub aqua, <sub aqua> maledicere temptant;

but Merkel would have ejected the emendation from the text, and
Merkel’s followers would be stoutly defending the corruption in
this year 1903. It happens however that the true reading is pre-
served in the better MSS Marc. and N cap. ; and for that reason, not
because it is true, it holds possession. ‚

But in trist. I 11 11 sq. it is not one MS but the MSS in general
which give

seu stupor huic studio sine est insania nomen,
omnis ab hac cura mens releuata mea est.

Here, though the aimless change from ‘huic studio’ to ‘hac
cura’ suggests that something has gone wrong, the suspicion is
fainter, and the true reading ,might never have been recovered
were it not preserved elsewhere, to wit in C.I.L. VI 9632

seu stupor est huic studio siue est insania nomen,
omnis ab hac cura cura leuata mea est.

This is Ovid all over, rem. 169 sq. ‘rura quoque oblectant
animos studiumque colendi: | quaelibet huic curae cedere cura potest,’
484 ‘et posita est cum cum repulsa noua.’ But Ovid’s editors will
not accept it, because to do so would involve recognising that all
the MSS, not only some of them, are deeply interpolated; and to
recognise this would cause them discomfort. So they will deny to
Ovid the aid which fortune has furnished him against his scribes,
and will defend the corrupt reading with the babble which we
have heard so often already that we can predict it before they have
time to utter it afresh : ‘ an inscription (now no longer extant) which
does not profess to quote Ovid’s words, and which gives the hexa-
meter in an unmetrical form, is not an authority to be set against
the consenting testimony of the MSS. Will it be proposed to
substitute for art. I 47 5 wid maqis est saxo durum the reading given
in O.1.L. Iv 1895 quid pote tan durum saxso?’ It is not because
cura leuata has been found in an inscription that it ought to stand
in the text, but because it is better and more Ovidian than the
MS reading, because it perfectly accounts for that reading, and
because, in addition to this, it has been found in an inscription.

ASTRONOMICON I lxi
At her. XI] 29 P has rightly

accipit hospitio iuuenes Aeeta Pelasgos.

But many MSS spell the king’s name oeta and destroy the verse ; so
G repairs it thus:

accipit hospitio-iuuenes pater Oeta. Pelasgos.
In her. XIV 91 only a few MSS have retained what the author wrote,
conatoque queri mugitus edidit ore.

The omission of -que before que- left an unmetrical conato queri,
which seems to have been the original reading of P: most MSS
have the conjectural emendation et comta queri. In her. XV 69
most MSS rightly read

et tamquam desint quae me sine ﬁne fatigent,

but in one copy fine dropped out after sine, and hence the Franco-
furtanus, usually the most faithful, has manufactured this precious
conjecture:

et tamquam desit quae me hac sine cura fatiget.

At trist. 111 5 39 sq. the MSS presented

quae ducis Emathii fuerit clementia, Porus
praeclarique docent funeris exequiae.

For praeclari Heinsius conjectured Darei: this would be ﬁrst mis-
taken for clari and then stretched to the right length by preﬁxing
prae. The nineteenth century brought to light the oldest MS L,
and in it stands the conjecture of Heinsius.

In trist. V 10 23,

est igitur rarus qui iam colere audeat,
the object of ‘ colere ’ is missing. Heinsius restored it:
est igitur rarus <rus> qui colere audeat,

whence first arose rams qui, and then iam to plump out the verse.

I will take from the tristia one more example, in which detection
of the fraud is made easier because the MSS do not conspire to
tell the same lie, but impair their credit by contradicting one
another. v 7 65 sq.

sic animum tempusque traho - - o reduco
a contemplatu summoueoque mali.

lxii M. MAN ILII

meumque the best MSS, me sicque others, meque ipse others again.
meque ipse is faultless, but if it had been the original the other two
readings could hardly have come into existence. me sieque, apart
from its clumsiness, is shown to be corrupt by the observations of
Madvig de ﬁn. v 40 and Haupt opusc. III 510; mecumque, which
has most authority, is evidently impossible. All three have a
common element, the letters meque, and all are attempts to make

· metre of a defective archetype: Ovid wrote

sic animum tempusque traho me<me> que reduco
a contemplatu summoueoque mali,

as he wrote in art. II 689 sq. ‘me uoces audire iuuat sua gaudia
fassas ; | atque, morer meme sustineamque, roget,’1 and as Silius
wrote in 1x 650 sq. ‘ comprimit ensem | nescio qui deus et meme ad

grauiora reseruat.’
At Lucr. 111 978 the Leyden MSS have

atque ea nimirum quaecumque Acherunte profundo.

The loss of e after e changed this to atque animirum‚ which looked
like atqve animarum 3 so the chief Italian us has the metrical
interpolation
atque animarum etiam quaecumque Acherunte profundo.
In moret. 34 most MSS give rightly
pectora lata, iacens mammis, compressior aluo.

ia was lost after ta and left lata cens, whence two uss have devised
lata germs. At culex 312 the right reading appears in I‘ and V
Ida faces altrix cupidis praebebat alumnis,
but the initial letter was lost, and the best and oldest MS B has
expanded da to daque. At 226 sq. B and I‘ give
in uanas abiere uices, et iure recessit
Iustitia,

where iure is a. mistake for rure. In one copy the syllable re was
written once for twice, iu recessit, and V has developed iu into uita.
The true reading of Luc. I 295

inmineat foribus pronusque repagula laxet
is preserved in most MSS ; but the haplography repaqulaxet has given

¹ Mr Ehwald prints this verse as ‘atque, morer, me, me sustineamque,
roget' : such notions of the Ovidian pentameter has the modern Ovidian critic.

ASTRONOMICON I lxiii

occasion in some for the interpolation pulset. At Stat. Theb.
XII 72 sq. the Puteaneus retains

o nisi magnanimae nimius te laudis inisset
ardor,

but because the syllable nim came twice over, maqmnirtmnhm'as
shrank to mammutius, and other MSS repair the loss with guesswork

o nisi magnanimus tantae te laudis inisset.
At Mart. x 14 7 sq. one family of MSS has the true reading

quando breuis gelidae missa est toga tempore brumae?
argenti uenit quando selibra mihi 1

but uenit was absorbed by -qenti, and the other family borrowed
missa from overhead to complete a pentameter :

argenti quando missa selibra mihi est?
Again at VI 32 4 one family keeps
et fodit certa pectora tota manu,

but in the others tota has been swallowed by -tora, and nuda takes
its place. And again at V 22 7,

uixque datur longas mulorum rumpere mandras,

this reading of one family, having shrunk to malorumve, becomes
in the other family mulorum uincere. And yet again at XII 61 5,
where two families agree in the right reading

in tauros Libyci ruunt leones,

ruunt was mistaken for want, as raim for minas in Aetn. 139, and
the third family comes to the aid of the verse with the interpola-
tion fro-munt.

This is just what I suppose to have happened in Maui]. v 45..
The man born under the sign Argo will become a seafarer :

rector erit puppis clauoque immobilis haerens

mutabit pelago terras uentisque sequetur

fortunam totumque uolet transnare profundum

classibus atque alios menses altumque uidere

Phasin et in cautes Tiphyn superare trementem. 45-

‘ trementem in cautes’ has no sense; ‘superare Tiphyn in cautes ’

lxiv M. MANILII

may perhaps be made to yield one, but Tiphys was no trembler.
tre-mmtem is a metrical expansion of montem, that is

in cautes Tiphyn superare ruentem.

‘ruentem in cautes’: ruit is the verb used by Valerius Flaccus in
describing the exploit at IV 676, ‘ praecepsque fragores | per medios
ruit.’ In G the corruption has gone further; ent was lost in the
sequence inem-entem, the remaining tremem looked like t‘remem,
and accordingly biremem stands in the text of this much interpo-
lated MS. Mr Vollmer in Berl. Phil. Woch. xx p. 1292, to extol
G at the expense of Manilius, says ‘zweifellos ist zu bessem in
caules Tiphyn superare triremi! Why, in fortune’s own‘ name,
should a man chase fortune in a trireme? and why, if he did so,
should his strange whim be mentioned at this particular point 'I
In Verg. Aen. Ix 782 the MSS Pyc read

quos alios muros quaeue ultra moenia habetis?

mu dwindled to eu and left gmeultm; MR prop the verse with
quae &zm ultra, and many editors inconsiderately adopt the interpo-
lation. In Aen. x 48 PM have

Aeneas sane ignotis iactetur in undis.

The letters of sane are those of -neas and were consequently
omitted, whereupon R ﬁlls the space with procul. At verse 7 05 of
the same book occurs a famous instance of such interpolation in the
Virgilian archetype. Bentley restored what the sense demands,

nec non Euanthen Phrygium Paridisque Mimanta
aequalem comitemque, una quem nocte Theano

in lucem genitori Amyco dedit et face praegnas

Cisseis regina Parin: <Paris> urbe paterna 705
occubat, ignarum Laurens habet ora Mimanta.

But Paris was absorbed by Parin, and Virgil’s MSS have erect in
its place.
The interpolation in Aen. 1x 579 is still undetected. The
MSS have
sternit . . .

Priuernum Capys. hunc primo leuis hasta Themillae

strinxerat : ille manum proiecto tegmine demens

ad uolnus tulit 3 ergo alis adlapsa sagitta,

et laeuo adﬁxa est lateri manus, abditaque intus 579

spiramenta animae letali uolnere rupit.

ASTRONOMICON I lxv

adfixa Py, but infixa MRbc: Seruius’ lemma. has adfioea, but his
quotation of Iv 689 shows that he read infixa. The spear of
Themillas had grazed the skin of Priuernas, whereupon he like a
fool dropped his shield and clapped his hand on the place. Ac-
cordingly the arrow of Capys came winging up, and . . . his hand
was pinned to his left side, and . . . driven deep within inﬂicted a
mortal wound on the lungs. What a narrative! To begin with,
the left side is the very last place where a man who was carrying a
shield would be grazed by a spear: consequently it is not the place
on which Priuernus clapped his hand, and consequently, when
Capys’ arrow struck his left side, it found no hand there to pin.
And the thing which pierced Priuernus’ lungs and wounded him to
death must certainly have been Capys’ arrow; whereas the text
says it was his own hand. Now where all MSS give nonsense and
are therefore corrupt, those MSS are to be preferred which give the
worst nonsense, because they are likely to be the least interpolated ,-
and here infixa is seen by its naked absurdity to be a remnant of
the truth, and adfixa to be a conjectural emendation. adfixa was
invented to suit the manus which is now the subject of the clause,
infixa refers to the sagitta which ought to be its subject: manus is a
metrical stopgap like creat in x 705 and prowl in x 483 and the
metrical defect which provoked it arose in this verse as in those
from the absorption of like by like:

ergo alis adlapsa sagitta
et laeuo inﬁxa est <alte> lateri abditaque intus
spiramenta animae letali uolnere rupit.

alte is easily confused with late, as Aen. I 427 alta MPR, lata F, IX
151 ‘summae custodibus arcis’ MP, late (i.e. altae) FR, Liu. XXII
28 14 latera, altera; then latalaum· shrank to lateri, and the
collapsing verse was distended with manus. For the elision see
VIII 96 ‘ placido aequore.’

Juvenal at XIII 179 is preaching against revenge, and says
that it is both unsatisfying and odious.

‘ nullane peiuri capitis fraudisque nefandae
poena erit'l’ abreptum crede hune grauiore catena
protinus et nostro (quid plus uelit ira 2) necari
arbitrio: manet illa tamen iactura, nec umquam
depositum tibi sospes erit, sed corpore trunco
inuidiosa dabit minimus solacia sanguis. 179
e

lxvi M. MAN ILII

There is not in the Latin language a more inapposite adjective
than minimus. You put a man to death for cheating you: suppose,
a foolish supposition, that the man has little blood in his veins,
or suppose that you, in putting him to death, shed little of
that blood: what then? How does that either diminish or
increase the satisfaction which you experience? How does it
either increase or diminish the hatred which you incur? No
answer. And this ridiculous minimus usurps the place of an
absent adverb which the sense requires and the reader must
mentally supply. The scholiast says nothing about minimus,
though it is the word which most invites a scholium, but he says
‘id est, etiamsi decolletur, nihil inde lucri habebis nisi inuidiosam
defensionem! Just so:

inuidiosa dabit <solum> solacia sanguis.

The scribe passed from sol- to sol-, and his successor ﬁlled the space
with the ﬁrst word that occurred to him, perhaps remembering
X 217 ‘minimus gelido iam in corpore sanquis? It is true that
‘solum solacia,’ being a conjecture, will sound ill to many who
never stumble at Verg. Aen. 111 183 ‘casus Cassandra canebat.’

These are verses where the loss of words or syllables has been
made good by stopgaps. Now come others where the metro,
spoilt by corruption, has been mended by transposition.

The case of qu. VIII 148 is now notorious: the true reading

ipse rotam adstringit sufflamine mulio consul

is preserved in the ﬂorilegium Sangallense; mulio became multo,
and the cod. Burn. 192 has sub flamine multo consul; the rest
arrange the unmetrical words in metrical order, the majority giving
multo sufflamine consul, the minority consul sufflamine multo. In
Ouid. fast. I 245 the second-best MS reads rightly

arx mea collis erat, quem uolgus nomine nostro
nuncupat.

But a: and a are much confused, so am became ara and upset the
verse, and the best MS has the interpolation ara mea est colli. At
trist. V 5 55 there has been bolder work : the best MSS retain

cum Pelia genitae tot sint, cur nobilis una. est?

but nobilis was mistaken for nobis, and the majority in lieu of

ASTRONOMICON I lxvii

nobilis um est present coqnita nobis. At Stat. Theb. VIII 459 the
truth is preserved in the best MS

Pallas huic praesens, illum Tirynthius implet.

But haic was corrupted by illum to the monosyllabic hum, and most
MSS restore the ruined metre by transposing hwnc Pallas. The
siluae unluckily are handed down to us in no good MS, and when

we ﬁnd at silu. I 1 27 sq.
te signa ferente
et minor in leges iret gener et Cato castris

we have nothing to help us but our own wits. The sense is ‘if
you, Domitian, had been in Caesar’s place, both Pompey and Cato
would have surrendered their independence.’ castris is a superﬂuity
and an encumbrance, and in leges lacks an epithet, either tuas or
Caesaris. The verse is a. rearrangement of these unmetrical words

et minor in leges gener et Cato castris iret,

and castris is casaris (Ouid, her. XIX 157 msera P for castra), and
caseris is cesaris: ‘tu si dux fuisses, et Pompeius, Magnus ille
quidem sed socero minor (Ouid. fast. I 603 sq. ‘Magne, tuum
nomen rerum est mensura tuarum, I sed qui te uicit nomine maior
erat’: Mr Vollmer only cites passages which are nothing to the
point), et Cato in leges irent Caesarianas’: see Mart. XI 5 9-14
‘te (Nerua) duce gaudebit Brutus . . . et te . . . Magnus amabit

. ipse quoque infernis reuocatus Ditis ab umbris I si Cato
reddatur, Caesarianus erit.’ After I had been put to the trouble
of making this correction I found that it had been made long ago
by Scriuerius and neglected by everybody since, even Gronouius
and Markland.

There are several instances of such interpolation within the four
hundred verses of the culex. 192

et ualidum dextra detraxit ab arbore truncum
stands unaltered in I‘ ; but ab swallowed arb- and left detraxit ab ore

truncum, which B and V have reduced to metre by the transposition
truncum delraoeit ab ore. 210

‘ quis ' inquit ‘ meritis ad quae delatus acerbas
cogor adire uices.’

This is preserved by no MS, but I‘ has quid inquit3 B and V for I
metre’s sake transpose inquit quid. 357

omnis in aequoreo ﬂuitat iam naufraga fluctu.

lxviii M. MAN ILII

V and I‘ have this order 3 but flwitat was corrupted to fluctuat and
B rearranges the words as fluctuat omnis in aequoreo. 366

cui cessit Lydi timefacta potentia regis.

1" has kept this reading with no error but a false division of words
{idithim sacta. But lv'ditime or loeditime looked like leqitime, and
since this was unmetrical B and V have changed the order to
legitime cessit cm' facta.
Verg. Aen. Ix 402 sq. now stand in MP as follows:
ocius adducto torquens hastile lacerto
suspiciens altam lunam et sic uoce precatur.

RV have altam ad for altam, but Virgil’s construction is the
accusative, Aen. x 898 sq., XII 196, buc. Ix 46, georg. 1 375 sq.
The sentence has no structure unless et is removed or some other
change is made. Suppose that once upon a time the text was

suspicit altam ens lunam et sic uoce precatur,
this would become suspiciens altam in a trice. But it should be
suspicit altam <am>ens lunam et sic uoce precatur.

See 424 sq. ‘ tum uero exterritus, amens, | conclamat Nisus,’ II 7 45
‘ quem non incusaui amem hominumque deorumque 't'
In Lucr. VI 1135 sq. the MSS offer

an caelum nobis uitro natura corumptum
deferat aut aliquid quo non consueuimus uti.

m'tro was early and easily corrected to ultro, but wrwnptum still
remains a stumbling-block. On the one hand it seems impossible,
and certainly wants better evidence than is forthcoming, that
Lucretius should have said mptum or Lucilius cdomqot05 but on the
other hand Lachmann's 60th could hardly have been altered thus,
and Isidore attests the participle of ‘corrumpo' with his ‘aer
Wm ex aliis caeli partibus ueniens.’ Consider corumptwm and
ail/r0 together, and the corruption, or corumption, is explained.
What the uss present is a. rearrangement of words designed to
better the metre of this:

an caelum nobis corruptum deferat uitro
natura aut aliquid quo non consueuimus uti.

deserat witro could be scanned by nobody: natum corruption could
be scanned, in the ages of faith, by many a humble Christian; for

ASTRONOMICON I lxix

true religion enabled men not only to defy tortures but to shorten
the ﬁrst syllables of colloco and parricida, Muell. de r. m. ed. 2
pp. 447 sq.

VII

The poet’s name is not preserved in the mss of the family a.
The heading of G is now erased and Malius poeta written over it by
a hand of the 15th or 16th century; it once ﬁlled two lines
and was presumably the same which now stands in L and Cus.,
Arati philosophi astronomiam liber primus incipit prelibalio. None of
these three MSS has any other inscriptions or subscriptions. Poggio,
in the letter announcing to Barbara his discovery of B and quoted
on p. viii, names the author M. Manilium astronmnicum. The ﬁrst
page of M is missing, but its inscription can probably be recovered
from U: M. Manilii astrmimniccm liber primus foeliciter incipit.
M elsewhere gives the name as follows: after book I M. Manili,
after II M. Manlii Boeni, after III M. Milnili. V has M. Mallii Boeni
at the end of II and M. Mallii at the end of III; Vrb. 668 is
inscribed Marci Manilii Boeui astronomici liber primus incipit. Gerbert,
who reigned as Pope Sylvester II from 999 to 1003, writes in
August 988 in epist. 130 ed. Havet ‘fac ut mihi scribantur
M. Manlius de astrologia, Victorius de rhetorica, Demosthenis ophthal-
micus’: the author so styled however may be Anicius Manlius
Torquatus Seuerinus Boethius, and Gerbert in epist. 8 mentions
‘ VIII uolumina Boetii de astrologia.’

The date of the poem has been canvassed with merciless pro-
lixity for the last four-and-twenty years, but the pertinent facts are
few. That book I was written later than 9 A.D. is proved by the
mention of Varus’ disaster in u. 899 ; that it was written earlier
than the August of 14 AD. is proved by two passages which show
Augustus to be living, 384 sq. and 922 sqq. : one passage, 799—801,
which in its present form assumes Augustus to be dead, contains
an absurdity (caelum repleuit) and must therefore be corrected; and
to correct it is easy. That Augustus was still alive while book 11
was writing is proved by 507 sqq. ‘ Capricornus in ipsum I
conuertit uisus, quid enim mirabitur ille [ mains, in Augusti felix
cum fulserit ortuml’: were Augustus dead and Tiberius on the

e 2

lxx M. MAN ILII

throne, the instant answer to this question would be ‘id sidus, quod
in Tiberii ortum fulsit ’ ; for reigning emperors were always greater
than their predecessors. Book III contains nothing which bears
on the point. In book Iv (whose last verses 933—5, though eternally
cited and debated, prove nothing either way) Capricorn is fallen
from his high estate : at 243-58 we read that he engenders miners
and smiths and clothiers, and at 568—70 that his 30th point
engenders sailors; but of kings and kesars not a word. Worse
yet, in 257 sq. we have ‘Veneri mixto cum crimine seruit I pars
prior, at melior iuncta sub priste senecta est’: these words, with
their spice of truth and personality, were hardly written of
Augustus’ star in Augustus’ lifetime. Instead of Capricorn it is
Libra that now assumes the primacy of heaven, 548 sqq. ‘felix
aequato genitus sub pondere Librae. | iudex examen sistet uitaeque
necisque | imponetque iugum terris legesque rogabit. I illum urbes
et regna trement nutuque regentur | unius, et caeli post terras iura
manebunt,’ 773 sqq. ‘Hesperiam sua Libra tenet, qua condita
Rome. | orbis et imperio retinet discrimina rerum | lancibus et
positis gentes tollitque premitque ; | qua genitus Caesar melius
nunc condidit urbem I et propriis frenat pendentem nutibus orbem.’
Now not only Manil. II 507 sqq. quoted above but also Germ.
phaen. 558 sqq. ‘hic (Capricornus), Auguste, tuum genitali corpore
numen | attonitas inter gentis patriamque pauentem I in caelum
tulit et maternis reddidit astris,’ and Suet. Aug. 94 ‘tantam mox
ﬁduciam fati Augustus habuit, ut thema suum uulgauerit num-
mumque argenteum nota sideris Capricorni, quo natus est, per-
cusserit,’ and the many coins stamped with Augustus’ head on the
one side and Capricorn on the other, are clear proofs that Capricorn
was Augustus’ star: to show that Libra was his star there is
nothing ; 1 but to show that Libra was the star of Tiberius there is

² When Virgil in georg. 1 32-5 invites Augustus to a place in the zodiac
between Virgo and Scorpius (where Libra was inserted by those astronomers
who gave the zodiac twelve signs instead of eleven), he does so because there is
no room anywhere else; and the words ‘Libram qui Caesar habet’ de x11
signis 22 (P. L. M. Baehr. N p. 144) are an allusion to this passage of Virgil.
It is true that Augustus, if Suetonius Aug. 5 is right in saying ‘na'tus est
Augustus M. Tullio Cicerone C. Antonio coss. Ix kal. Oct. paulo ante solis
exontum,' was most likely born under Libra; for Sultan R'om. chron. p. 54
observes that in 63 B. C. the calendar would seem to have tallied pretty nearly
with the Julian, since the eclipse of the moon mentioned by Cicero de cons.
11 17-9 as taking place about the time of the seriae Latinae in that year must
be the eclipse which fell at half-past four in the morning of the 3rd of May by
our reckoning. If so, it is possible to hold that Capricorn was not the star

ASTRONOMICON I lxxi

one piece of evidence. A. von Sallet beitrage z. gesch. u. numism.
d. kﬁnige des Cimmer. Bosp. u. d. Pout. p. 69, W. von Voigt
Philologus vol. 58 p. 175, and Th. Reinaoh l’histoire par les
monnaies p. 143 describe a silver coin of Pythodoris queen of
Pontus struck in the year 60 of the Pontic era, whose relation to
the Varronian is not yet ascertained, and showing Tiberius’ head
on the obverse and the effigy of Libra on the reverse, just as
other coins, and among them one struck by Pythodoris in the
same year, show Augustus and Capricorn. This brings us to
another debated passage of book Iv, the verses 7 64 sqq. ‘ Rhodes,
hospitium recturi principis orbem, I tumque domus uere Solis,
cui tota sacrata est, | cum caperet lumen magni sub Caesare
mundi,’ in which the last words are generally supposed to mean
a luminary second only to the reigning emperor Augustus, as
Velleius II 99 in relating Tiberius’ withdrawal to Rhodes calls
him ‘uere alterum rei publicae lumen et caput! But if Tiberius
was the second light of heaven he resembled the Moon, and did
not at all resemble the Sun, which is the ﬁrst. The words are
capable of quite another sense, and ‘lumen magni sub Caesars
mundi’ may mean ‘the Sun, in the person of him who is now
emperor,’ to wit Tiberius: so II 3 ‘uictamque sub Hectore
Troiam,' 16 ‘sub fratre uiri nomen,’ 621 sqq. ‘plus . . . in
duplici . . . roboris . . . quam te, Nemeaee, sub uno,’ Iv 24 sq.
‘Troia sub uno | non euersa uiro,’ v 381 ‘ipse deum Cycnus
condit uocemque sub illo.’ It appears then that book Iv was
of his birth but of his conception; for it may perhaps be gathered from
Censorinus de die nat. 8 4 that the star of a man's conception was not, like
that of his birth, the star rising at that moment (the moment of conception is
seldom discoverable) upon the horoscope or eastern point, but the star in which
the sun was then situated, ‘ quo tempore partus concipitur, sol in aliquo signo
sit necesse est, et in aliqua eius particula, quem locum conceptionis proprie
sppellant’ ; and nine months before Ix kal. Oct. the sun would be situated in
Capricorn. But Suetonius expressly says ‘sideris Cspricorni, quo natus est,’
not conceptus, and he thus contradicts in c. 94 what he asserts in c. 5; for if
Augustus' birth took place under Capricorn on [x kal. Oct. it took place not
paulo ante solie exortum but circa meridiem.

Icannot quit the subject without recommending chronologers and unmis-
matists to study astrology before they write about it. Such a statement as
‘lag Octavian's Konzeption im Steinbock, so fault seine Geburt in die Wage' is
a pure mm sequitur, though made by a very learned man; and ‘ Horaz war vx
Id. Dec. im Schiitzen geboren' is an assertion of which I can only say that the
odds against its truth are 11 to 1. But who can blame these scholars, when an
editor of Manilius, who might be expected to know the rudiments of his system,

enunciates the similar ﬁction ‘Tiberii conceptus in Pisces, in Sagittarium
genitura incidit ¹ i

lxxii M. MANILII

written after Augustus’ death. Book V, like book III, contains
no indication of its date.

It seems to follow that the poem was not published as a
ﬁnished whole by Manilius himself. Whether he published it by
instalments or whether he never published it at all is a question
which I see no means of solving. That our ﬁve books form only
a portion of the whole design is plain enough. The account of
the planets, promised at II 965 and elsewhere, does not exist. At
V 28, speaking of constellations outside the zodiac, he proposes to
declare what effects they produce at their setting, ‘ cum merguntur
in undas’: the proper place for this information is in the gap
between V 709 and 710, where perhaps he gave it and it was
lost. Then, if the non-zodiacal signs produce effects at their
setting, so assuredly must the zodiacal, whose importance is so ¹
far superior; yet of this we are told nothing. And after all
these several pieces of instruction, we shall still require the
combination and co-ordination which he promises in II 750—87
and at III 587 sq. ‘mox ueniet mixtura suis cum uiribus
omnis, | cum bene materies steterit praecognita rerum’; for I
defy anyone to cast a nativity from the information furnished in
the poem as it stands. Were the books once eight in number?
Was Gerbert’s ‘M. Manlius de astrologia’ and his ‘VIII uolumina
Boetii de astrologia’ the complete work of the poet designated in
M by the name M. Manlii Boeni'l

This First Book of Manilius, his Sphaera, being purely
astronomical and complete in itself, can be detached without injury
from the astrological portion of the poem. It was my ﬁrst intention
to comment only on those passages where I was proposing new
explanations or conjectures or defences of the text. Thence I was
drawn on to signify my own judgment in places where former critics
and interpreters were at variance, and to correct many misappre-
hensions which I found revealed in the paraphrases of Fayus and
Pingré or lurking under the notes of other editors. These additions
so swelled the bulk of what I had written that I decided to take
one step more and to equip the text with a regular commentary.
This commentary is designed to treat of two matters only: what
Manilius wrote, and what he meant. From the illustration of his
phraseology and vocabulary, as distinct from the elucidation of his
language, I have purposely abstained ; not that I despise this
industry, but because life is short, and I have chosen other business

ASTRONOMIOON I lxxiii

which is more difficult and more important. Therefore at u. 1, to
begin at the beginning, I do not quote Verg. Aen. Iv 519 sq.
‘conscia fati | sidera' nor Auson. 163 17 sq. ‘tu caeli numeros et
wnscia sidera fati 1 callebas.’ Scaliger laid a foundation in this
department, Mr A. Cramer has made a considerable collection of
parallel phrases on pp. 61—89 of his treatise de Manilii elocutione
1882, and Manilius has now in Messrs E. Mueller and J. Moeller
a pair of diligent and well-read students who may be expected to
continue the work. There are other industries, now much in
vogue, from which I have abstained because I do despise them.
The sacred name of Posidonius, if I remember right, is not once
mentioned in my notes; and when I come to II 96 I shall not
pretend that Manilius, or Catullus either, imbibed from the
manuals of that Rhodian sage the daring theory that the moon’s
light is borrowed. If anyone is enamoured of speculations for
which no material exists, he is welcome to pursue them, atque
idem iungat uolpes et mulgeat hircos ; but the lot is fallen unto
me in a fair ground, I have a goodly heritage, and I leave the
sands of the sea to be ploughed by others.

It is no reproach to Scaliger and Bentley that they, amidst the
dust of their labours and the blaze of their discoveries, left much
undone which was easy to do and overlooked many things which
were plain to see. But it is a heavy reproach to the other editors,
whose discoveries are not dazzling and whose labours are not
Titanic, that they have let slip so many obvious and trivial
blunders whose detection required neither genius nor effort but only
common attention and ordinary acquaintance with Latin. It is not
decent that I, in the 20th century after Christ, should have to
remark that Pyrrhus (I 786) was not defeated by Papirius ; that
‘intra Capricorni sidus et mundum imo axe subnixum’ (I 375 sq.)
is not Latin for inter; and that Plzryxaei (111 304) is not the way to
spell le‘izei.1 But the strangest and most injurious of all these
elementary mistakes is that which vitiates the numerals in IV 443-
97 ; and since ignorance on this head is not conﬁned to editors of
Manilius but crops up in all texts of Ovid at fast. III 124 and in
many at her. XI 46, I will here transcribe my note on W 451.

Tauri nona mala est, similis quoi tertia pars est
post decimam, nec non decimae pars septima iuncta,

¹ Similar blunders may be found persisting in the text of less neglected
authors. Editors of Plato still print zpo‘c'vov for ‹polvou at symp. 211 A and Pam.
157 B, and editors of Sophocles let?» for M6! at Aiax 1100.

lxxiv M. MAN ILII

bisque undena notans et bis duodena nocentes, 451
quaeque decem trisque ingeminat, fraudatque duobus
triginta numeros, et tu, tricensima summa.

4⁶1 uotans', nocens libri.. qui sectum dicam ut nec Scaliger nec Bentleius, nam
ceteros uix numero, ne externa quidem huius uersiculi deformitate, quae in illis
nocem nocentes summa est, admoniti sint ut de Latini sermonis legibus aliquid
cogitarent neue neutralia pro femininis, distributiua pro ordinalibus habereut?
nam bis undena, bis duodena uolunt esse pars duoetuieensi‘ma, pars uicensima
quarta. atqui notissimum esse debebat pars bis undena Latine non partem
duoetuicensimam significare sed uiginti duas partes ; uelut Verg. Aen. v 120
terno ordine pro tribus ordinibus positum est, sil. xv 257 ter dena boue pro
triginta bubus. legitur quidem iu plerisque Ouidii codicibus her. XI 46 iam
nowiens erat orta soror palchen-ima Phoebi | denaque luciferos luna mouebat
equos, sed liber optimus Puteaneus nonaque exhibet, Gronouius plenaque
Bentleius pronaque proposuit, poteras etiam et noua. porro in eiusdem Ouidii
fastis, 111 124, omnes libri bis quino femina meme parit, sed facili emendatione
Maduigius adu. crit. 11 p. 106 bis quinto, quemadmodum fest. v1 768 scribitur
quintus ab extremo mense bis ille dies. primus, quantum obseruaui, barbarum
hoc loquendi genus inuexit Appuleius, quem de mag. 9 p. 403 bis septeno uere
pro quarto decimo dixisse metrum demonstrat3 itaque eundem met. 111 19 p.
208 duodeni laboris Herculei posuisse credibile est, cum duodecimi uellet. item
Ausonius 369 34 (Peip. p. 97) septeno cum lumina fudit ab astro posuit pro
septimo, neque intercedo quominus idem metro non cogente 250 1 (Peip. p. 335)
Iris octono sub consule pro bis octauo scripsisse censeatur, qui uersu tertio desieras
puer anne puella uideri dicere sustinuerit. sed Nemesianus in cyneg. 123 bina
lampade non dixit pro altera lampade sed prorsus recte pro duplici, in his, cum
se Mna formarit lampade Phoebe, id est cum luna bis (non iterum) plena fuerit.
iu Claud. v1 cons. Hon. 391 centenus consul non magis pro centensimo positum
est quam 388 sq. centum messibus pro centensima messe ; nedum ut Martialis,
cum VIII 45 4 amphora centeno concalefacta minor scriberet, centensimo uoluerit.
hoc autem Manilii uersu, ut uidetur, deceptus Scaliger innocenti poetae non
minus tribus locis similem soloecismum adfinxit; nam 455 ter quina ec (hoc est
ter quintae) noxia par est in ter quinae, 461 nec ter quintae clementior usus in
ter quinae (ita sane G), 478 quae ter quinta notatur in ter quina mutauit:
successit operi Bentleius et pro bis quinta salubri |' terque caret caelo 465 sq.
nouauit bis quina. superest igitur ut u. 472 pro quae ter decimam cludit sors
ultima partem scribatur ter denam et v 365 ter decima sub parce seri inter dena
et eiusdem libri 490 bis sextamque notat parte-m fluuialis Aquari in bis senam
mutetur. neque Martialem Hispanum Latine loquentem feremus, sed Iv 57 4
pro quo te bis decimus ducit ab urbe lapis faciemus bis denus, item bis denae vn
65 1 pro bis decumae numrantemsriyora brumae; in his autem, 1 15 3 bis iam
paene iibi consul tricensimus instat, quia tricenus numeri nou admittunt, graue
mendum subesse dicemus. ne a lapidibus quidem temperabimus, sed C.I.L. VI
5534 2 pro annus ut accedat, ter mihi quintus erat scribemus quinus. ceterum
huius uersus Iv 451, qualem eum restitui, sententia haec est: et ea pars, quae
bis undena notat, et ea, quae bis duodena, nocentes sunt. simili oratioue usus
est u. 485 uel cum ter dena ﬁgural et 487 decimamque sequens quam tertia signal.
erat cum conicerem bisque undena nocens et bis duodena recensens, cui
similia sunt 484 euntque iterum duodena refert, Claud. v1 cons. Hon. 392 his
armis, qni lustra mihi bis dena recensent.

After these grammatical oversights there is nothing marvellous

ASTRONOMICON I lxxv

in the composure with which editors accept such maunderings as
II 231 ‘ ambiguus terrae Capricornus, Aquarius undis' (which means
‘Capricornus, de quo terra, Aquarius, de quo undae ambigunt’), or
such chaos as III 265-71, where three verses (268—70) describing
the motions of the planets have found their way by some mischance
into a passage describing the lengthening and shortening of the
days, and are serenely rendered by the translators and expounded
by the commentators as if they belonged to it.

At the end of the volume I have added conjectures on books
II and III and Iv: my conjectures on book v are printed in the
Journal of Philology for 1900, vol. XXVII pp. 162-5. Most of my
corrections of book I were published in 1898 in the same Journal,
vol. XXVI pp. 60—3.

